Encyclopedic Dictionary F.A. Brockhaus and I.A. Efron
Rocky Mountains
InterpretationTranslation

Rocky Mountains
(Rocky mountains) - that's the name. mountain system in the west. parts of Sev. America, located between 35 and 64 ° N. sh. and 104 and 130 s. and filling British Columbia and the states of Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, Wyoming and Montana. The mountain system consists in the southern and northern parts of a series of chains parallel from north to south, containing plateaus and valleys and crossed in the middle part by transverse ridges. To the west the slopes fall steeper, to the east more sloping. The northern mountains are divided by the transverse valleys of the North Platte (43°) and Missouri (47°) rivers into three parts. The southern part, 900 km long, begins at the Mexican border and stretches along both banks of the river. Rio Grande. The main ranges are: Sangre de Christo Range, Sao Juan Mountain, Park Range, Colorado Range and Black Mountain. Highest points: Blanca Peak (4409), Peaks Peak (4312), Long Peak (4350) and Mount Harvard (4381). Evans Mountain Pass (2514 m; the Pacific Railroad passes through it). In the middle part, 600 km long, the river originates. Windriver, Missouri tributary, Snack River, tributary Columbia, and Green River, etc. Colorado; to the SW is Yellowstone National Park (see). In the northern part, the main longitudinal valley stretches along the river. Colombia. In British Columbia, the highest peaks are Mount Brown (4880) and Mount Hooker. Between them is the Athabasca mountain pass. The northern mountains are rich in gold, silver, copper, lead, iron, coal, and other minerals.

Encyclopedic Dictionary F.A. Brockhaus and I.A. Efron. - St. Petersburg: Brockhaus-Efron. 1890-1907.

See what "Rocky Mountains" is in other dictionaries:
Rocky Mountains - English Rocky Mountains ... Wikipedia

Rocky Mountains - Elbert Location: British Columbia, Alberta (Canada), Idah ... Encyclopedia of tourists

Rocky Mountains - Montana Geographical names of the world: Toponymic dictionary. M: AST. Pospelov E.M. 2001. Rocky Mountains, east. part of the horn ... Geographic Encyclopedia

ROCKY MOUNTAINS - ROCKY MOUNTAINS, mountains in the Cordillera system of North America (Canada, USA). Length 3200 km. Altitude up to 4399 m (Mount Elbert). Geysers, thermal springs; frequent earthquakes. They form a watershed between the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. In ... ... Modern Encyclopedia

ROCKY MOUNTAINS - (Rocky Mountains) mountains in the Cordillera system in western Canada and the USA, between 60 and 32. p. sh. Length approx. 3200 km, width up to 700 km, height up to 4399 m (Elbert). Geysers, thermal springs; earthquakes are common. Deposits of phosphorites, copper (Butte) ... Big Encyclopedic Dictionary

Rocky Mountains - I (Rocky Mountains), mountains in the Cordillera system in western Canada and the USA, between 60 and 32 ° N. sh. Length about 3200 km, width up to 700 km, height up to 4399 m (Mount Elbert). Geysers, thermal springs; earthquakes are common. Deposits of phosphorites, copper ... ... Encyclopedic Dictionary

ROCKY MOUNTAINS - a phosphorite-bearing basin in the USA (in the central part of the mountain range of the same name in Idaho, Wyoming, Montana and Utah). Operated since 1906. 350 thousand km².; Stocks approx. 6 billion tons, P2O5 content 18 36%. Sedimentary phosphorite-bearing siliceous ... ... Big Encyclopedic Dictionary

Rocky Mountains - (Rocky Mountains) phosphorite-bearing basin of the United States, occupying the territory. Zap. states (Aedaho, Wyoming, Montana, etc.). The area of ​​the basin is 350 thousand km2. Opened in 1889. Includes St. 20 phosphorite mines (Soda Springs, Pocatello, Anaconda, etc.). M… … Geological Encyclopedia

rocky mountains — noun, number of synonyms: 1 • mountain system (62) ASIS Synonym Dictionary. V.N. Trishin. 2013 ... Synonym dictionary

Rocky Mountains - (Rocky Mountains, Rockies) Rocky MountainsRockies, ch. a mountain range in North America that extends approximately 4,800 km from the US-Mexico border to the Yukon Territory at northeast. Canada. Mountains separate the Great Plains from the coast ... ... Countries of the world. Dictionary

Books
Rocky Mountains, Jesse Russell. This book will be produced in accordance with your order using Print-on-Demand technology. High Quality Content by WIKIPEDIA articles! The Rocky Mountains are the main… Details Buy for 1125 rubles
Farewell, rocky mountains!, Yuri Semenov. This book will be produced in accordance with your order using Print-on-Demand technology. September 1944... Finland is coming out of a lost war, and the fascist units are waiting with horror ... Details Buy for 358 rubles
Farewell, Rocky Mountains!, YI Semenov. September 1944... Finland is coming out of a lost war, and the fascist units are waiting with horror for the inevitable offensive of the Red Army. These days, a group of Lieutenant Sergei is leaving behind enemy lines ... Details Buy for 161 rubles
Other books on request "Rocky Mountains" >>