Rocky Mountains
Rocky Mountains
Moraine Lake 17092005.jpg
Geographic-administrative location
Continent (or subcontinent) America
Country(s) Flag of Canada.svg Canada
Flag of the United States.svg United States
Division(s) Flag of British Columbia.svg British Columbia (CAN)
Flag of Alberta.svg Alberta (CAN)
Flag of Montana.svg Montana (USA)
Flag of Idaho.svg Idaho (USA)
Flag of Wyoming.svg Wyoming (USA)
Flag of Utah.svg Utah (USA)
Flag of Colorado.svg Colorado (USA)
Flag of New Mexico.svg New Mexico (USA)
Geographic characteristics
Far North Rocky Subsystems
Canadian Rockies
Central Montana Rockies
Rockies Idaho-Bitterroot
Great Rockies of Yellowstone
western rockies
Southern Rockies
Northwest-Southeast Orientation
max. elevation Mount Elbert, 4,401 m (Colorado)
Coordinates 39°07′01″N 106°26′43″OCoordinates: 39°07′01″N 106°26′43″W
[edit data on Wikidata]

Location of the Rocky Mountains.
The Rocky Mountains, or Rocky Mountains (Rocky Mountains or Rockies in English) is a system of mountain ranges located in the western sector of North America and that runs parallel to the western coast, from British Columbia in the northwest, passing through the border between Alberta and British Columbia and reaching the southwestern United States, in New Mexico. The highest peak is Mount Elbert in Colorado, at 4,401m.

The Rocky Mountains were formed during the Cenozoic orogenesis and are made up of a central core of crystalline rocks surrounded by lateral formations of sedimentary rocks; the system has been profoundly marked by quaternary glaciation and atmospheric erosion, and presents examples of volcanic phenomena. They have important mineral reserves, such as gold, silver, lead, zinc, copper and, in marginal regions, oil and coal.

In its high areas, high mountain meadows extend; in the valleys there are agricultural crops, cereals and potatoes; and sheep farming in the northern parts of the US sector. Crossed by many railways and highways that enhance its natural beauty (protected by many national parks), the Rocky Mountains are also a notable tourist attraction with many vacation and winter sports locations.

Index
1 story
1.1 Indigenous natives
1.2 European explorations
1.3 Settlements
2 Geography
2.1 Canadian Rockies
2.2 The sectors of the Rockies
3 See also
4 Notes
5 external links
History
indigenous natives
Since the last great ice age, the Rocky Mountains have been home to Native American peoples including Apaches, Arapahos, Bannocks, Blackfeet, Cheyennes, Crows, Flatheads, Shoshones, Sioux, Utes, Kutenai (Ktunaxa in Canada ), sekanis, dunne-za and others. Paleoindians hunted the now extinct mammoth and ancient bison (an animal 20% larger than modern bison) in the foothills and valleys of the mountains. Like the modern tribes that followed them, the Paleoindians likely migrated to the plains in the fall and winter to hunt bison and to the mountains in the spring and summer for fish, deer, elk, roots, and berries. In Colorado, along the crest of the continental divide, rock walls built by natives to conduct game have been dated to 5,400-5,800 years ago. There is growing scientific evidence indicating that indigenous people had significant effects on mammal populations through hunting and on vegetation patterns through deliberate burning.1

European explorations
The recent human history of the Rocky Mountains is a story of rapid change. Spanish explorer Francisco Vázquez de Coronado—with a group of African soldiers, missionaries, and slaves—entered the Rocky Mountain region from the south in 1540.2 The introduction of the horse, metal tools, rifles, new diseases, and different cultures changed deeply Native American cultures. Native American populations were driven from most of their historic ranges by disease, war, habitat loss (bison eradication), and ongoing attacks on their culture.1

In 1739, French fur traders Pierre and Paul Mallet, while traveling across the Great Plains, discovered a range of mountains at the headwaters of the Platte River, which the local American Indian tribes called the "Rockies," making them the first Europeans in reporting on this uncharted mountain range.3


Sir Alexander MacKenzie in 1800.
Sir Alexander MacKenzie (1764-1820) became the first European to cross the Rocky Mountains in 1793.4 He found the upper reaches of the Fraser River and reached the Pacific coast of what is now Canada on July 20 of that year, completing the first recorded transcontinental voyage from North America north