New Mexico
from Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
New Mexico
New Mexico
Flag Emblem
Location in the USA
Country Flag of USA USA
The capital of Santa Fe
Area 314 916 km²
Population (2015) 2,085,109 people
6.62 people / km²
Governor Susanna Martinez
Mountain time zone: UTC-7 / -6
Postal code NM
ISO 3166-2 NM US-NM
Official site www.newmexico.gov
New Mexico in General Media
New Mexico (English: New Mexico, Spanish: Nuevo México, translated as "New Mexico") is a state in the United States, whose zip code is NM, and the capital is called Santa Fe. New Mexico has a population of 2,085,109 people (2015). The total area of ​​the state is 315,194 km².

Contents
1 Geography
2 History
3 Demographics
3.1 Population
3.2 Cities
3.3 Districts
3.4 Race and ethnic origin
3.5 Languages
3.6 Religions
3.6.1 Religious affiliation
4 Sources
Geography
New Mexico borders Arizona to the west, Colorado to the north, Texas and Oklahoma to the east, and Texas to the south. New Mexico also touches the southeastern corner of Utah. Part of the southern border of New Mexico is adjacent to the border between the United States and Mexico, where New Mexico borders the Mexican states of Chihuahua and Sonora.

The eastern border of New Mexico lies at 103 ° longitude with the state of Oklahoma, and 5 km west of 103 ° W longitude with Texas. To the south it borders the state of Texas and the Mexican states of Chihuahua and Sonora. The states of New Mexico, Colorado, Arizona and Utah meet in the northwest corner of New Mexico. New Mexico is a vast area with little water. The water area is only about 650 km². The average rainfall in New Mexico is only 380 mm / year.

The landscape varies from vast deserts to high rocky plateaus and high mountains covered with snow. Despite the dry view of New Mexico, much of the state, especially in the north, is covered with abundantly forested wild mountains. The Sangre de Cristo Mountains, the southernmost part of the Rocky Mountains, run roughly from north to south along the east coast of the Rio Grande. The most important rivers in New Mexico are the Rio Grande, the Rio Pecos, the San Juan, and the Gila. The Rio Grande is the third longest river in the United States.

Cacti, yucca, creosote shrubs, wormwood and desert grasses cover the vast semi-arid plains that span the eastern part of the state.

The federal government is protecting millions of acres of New Mexico as national forests. They are:

Carson (National Forest)
Saibola (National Forest)
Lincoln National Forest
Santa Fe (National Forest)
the Hilla desert
Other protected lands include the following monuments and parks:

Ruins of the Aztecs (national monument)
Bendelier (National Monument) in Los Alamos
Kapulin Volcano (National Monument)
Carlsbad Caves (National Park)
Chaco (National Historical Park)
El Malpais (National Monument) in Grants
El Moro (National Monument)
Fort Union (National Monument)
Hilla Cliff (National Monument) near Silver City
Pecos (National Historical Park)
Petroglyph (national monument) near Albuquerque
The Salinas Pueblo Missions (National Monument)
White Sands (national monument) near Alamogordo
Visitors interact with the Puebos Indian tribes preserved in New Mexico. Tourists who visit these places bring significant funds to the state. Other areas of geographical and panoramic interest are the Kasha-Katuwe Tent Rocks National Monument and the Valles Caldera National Reserve. Gila Wilderness is located in the southeast of the state.

History

Symbols of the Southwest, hot peppers and bleached cow skulls, hang at a market in Santa Fe
The first known settlers of New Mexico were members of the Clovis clan of the Paleo-Indians. In fact, the culture is named after the city of New Mexico, where the first archaeological remains were discovered. Later settlers included Indians of the Anasac and Mogul cultures. At the time of contact with Europe in 1500, the area was inhabited by the Puebo tribe with Navajo, Apache and Ute groups. Francisco de Coronado organized a large expedition to Compostela in 1540 - 1542 to search for the mystical seven cities of Cibola gold, described by Alvar Nunes Cabeza de Vaca, who had returned from an eight-year arduous journey from Florida to Mexico. The people of Coronado did not find rich cities of gold, but instead several Indian settlements in the dried mud. Subsequent extensive expeditions also failed to discover the famous cities of the southwest, and devastated and discouraged, the people of Coronado returned to Mexico, leaving New Mexico behind.

Fifty years later, Juan de Onyate founded the colony of San Juan on the banks of the Rio Grande in 1598, the first permanent European settlement in the future state of New Mexico.

In 1609, Pedro de Peralta, who later became governor of the province of New Mexico, founded the village of Santa Fe at the foot of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains.

Demographics

Albuquerque is located in central New Mexico, it is the largest city in the state. It houses the University of New Mexico

Las Cruces is located in the southern part of New Mexico, it is the second most populous city in the state. It houses the State University of New Mexico

Santa Fe stands up