September 11, 2001 attacks
"9/11" redirects here. For other uses, see 911 (disambiguation) .
September 11, 2001 attacks
September 11 Photo Montage.jpg
From top to bottom: World Trade Center fire, collapsed section of the Pentagon, Flight 175 crashes into WTC 2, a firefighter calls for help at Ground Zero, an engine from Flight 93 is recovered, and Flight 77 crashes into the Pentagon.
Place	New York , Arlington County ( Virginia ), Shanksville ( Pennsylvania ) United States
Flag of the United States.svg 
coordinates	40 ° 42′47 ″ N 74 ° 00′49 ″ OCoordinates : 40°42′47″N 74°00′49″W( map )
White(s)	civil and military
Date	As September November as 2001 (15 years)
8:46 to 10:28 ( UTC-4 )
attack type	Terrorist attack , Mass murder , Suicide attack
Weapon (s)	American Airlines Flight 11 United Airlines
Flight 175 American Airlines Flight
77 United Airlines
Flight 93
dead	3016 dead (including the 19 terrorists and the 24 disappeared)
Wounded	More than 6000
Perpetrator(s)	Al-Qaeda
Reason	Jihadism
[ edit data at Wikidata ]
The attacks of September 11, 2001 (commonly known as 9/11 or with the numeronym 11-S ) were a series of four suicide terrorist attacks committed that day in the United States by 19 members of the jihadist network Al Qaeda , by kidnapping of commercial airplanes to be impacted against various targets, causing the death of around 3,000 people and leaving another 6,000 injured, as well as the destruction in New York of the entire complex of buildings of the World Trade Center(including the Twin Towers) and serious damage to the Pentagon building (headquarters of the United States Department of Defense , in the state of Virginia ), an episode that would precede the war in Afghanistan and its adoption by the US government and its allies of the so-called ' war on terrorism ' policy.

The attacks were committed by 19 members of Al Qaeda, 1 divided into four groups of hijackers, each of them with a terrorist pilot who would be in charge of piloting the plane once the cabin crew had been reduced. The planes of flights 11 of American Airlines and 175 of United Airlines were the first to be hijacked, being both crashed into the two twin towers of the World Trade Center , the first against the North tower and the second shortly after against the South, causing that both skyscrapers collapsed in the following two hours. 2 3

The third plane hijacked belonged to flight 77 of American Airlines and was used to be hit against one of the facades of the Pentagon , in Virginia . The fourth plane, belonging to United Airlines flight 93 , did not reach any objective when it crashed in an open field, near Shanksville, Pennsylvania , after losing control in the cabin as a result of the confrontation between passengers and crew with the terrorist command. It would eventually target the United States Capitol , located in the city of Washington.

The attacks caused more than 6,000 injuries, the death of 2,973 people and the disappearance of another 24, 4 of which were also killed by the 19 terrorists.

The attacks, which were immediately condemned as "horrendous terrorist attacks" by the United Nations Security Council , 5 were characterized by the use of commercial aircraft as weapons, provoking a reaction of widespread fear throughout the world and particularly in Western countries. , which has since altered international aviation security policies .

Index 
1	Background
2	Planning of the attacks
3	The attacks
3.1	9/11 timeline
3.2	victims
3.3	survivors
3.4	The collapse of the World Trade Center
3.4.1	Damage
3.5	The kidnappers
3.5.1	Other potential hijackers
4	attacks with anthrax
5	Long-term effects
5.1	economic effects
5.2	Impact of 9/11 on the economy
5.3	Potential health effect
6	Authorship
6.1	Responsibilities
6.1.1	Al Qaeda involvement
6.1.2	Support groups within the United States
6.1.3	A support cell in Spain
6.2	Reasons
7	The American response
7.1	Search for survivors, recovery of bodies and compensation
7.2	public response
7.3	Internal security measures in the United States
7.4	9/11 Commission
8	international repercussions
8.1	international response
8.2	afghanistan war
8.3	Iraq war
9	Tributes
10	conspiracy hypotheses
11	film adaptations
12	See also
13	References
14	Bibliography
14.1	documents
14.1.1	National 9/11 Commission
14.1.2	United States Congress
14.1.3	FEMA (US Federal Emergency Management Agency)
14.1.4	Human Rights Watch
15	external links
15.1	Sites with information about 9/11
15.2	9/11 Articles
15.3	videos
Background

The 1993 World Trade Center bombing carried out with a van bomb in the parking lot of the north tower (the one with an antenna) killed 6 people but did not achieve its objective of demolishing the north tower and making it fall on the south tower.
The United States had already suffered a series of attacks caused by Islamic terrorism in the previous decades. In the 1980s, the 1983 Beirut Barracks Bombing killed 241 US soldiers stationed there (and 58 French soldiers). In the 1990s, the 1993 World Trade Center bombing caused by a van bomb in the foundation of one of the towers killed 6 people and the 1998 terrorist attacks on the US embassies in Kenya and Tanzania caused the death of 213 people, including 12 Americans. And in the year 2000 the attack on the USS Cole provoked with a suicide boat bomb killed 17 American sailors.

Planning of the attacks
The idea for suicide plane attacks came from Khalid Sheikh Mohammed , who first presented it to Osama Bin Laden in 1996, 6 after the failure of a similar large project aborted by the Philippine police in 1995 called " Operation Bojinka ". In 1999 a group of radicalized Muslims living in Hamburg , Germany and later dubbed the " Hamburg Cell " traveled to Afghanistan to receive training to fight the Russians in the Second Chechen War.. At that time Bin Laden recruited them, financed and trained them in the following months to carry out suicide operations with planes against emblematic US buildings.

The original plan was to hijack 12 planes of which 11 would be crashed into the following buildings: two planes into the World Trade Center twin towers , one into the Empire State Building (both attacks in New York ); another against the Pentagon (in Arlington ); another against the Prudential Tower (in Boston ); another 2 against the White House and the United States Capitol in ( Washington, DC ); another against the Sears Tower (in Chicago ); another against the US Bank Tower (inLos Angeles ); another against the Transamerica Pyramid (in San Francisco ); and lastly another aircraft against the Columbia Center (in Seattle ). 7 8

Subsequently, due to the number of targets identified, it was considered an overwhelming operation and the targets were reduced from 11 buildings to 5: the two twin towers (which represented the US capitalist economy and had already suffered an attack in 1993 ); the Pentagon (representing military power); the Capitol (representing political power) and the White House (representing presidential power). However, the fifth plane was never hijacked because the suicide pilot who was to direct it ( Zacarias Moussaoui ) was detained by the FBI on August 16, 2001 on immigration charges. 9 10

About three weeks before the attacks, the targets were assigned to four teams. The Capitol was codenamed "The Law School." The Pentagon was called "The College of Fine Arts". The code of the World Trade Center was "The Faculty of Urbanism". eleven

The attacks
Four planes of 205 passengers and 15 children were abducted as they flew to the state of California from Boston Logan International Airport , the Airport Washington Dulles International and Newark Liberty International Airport . The four planes were destined for the state of California , the first three planes to Los Angeles and the last plane to San Francisco , for which their fuel tanks were filled with about 91,000 liters (about 65,455 kg ). 12 The first two planes hit the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center , the third hitthe Pentagon , in Arlington County , near Washington DC, and the fourth open field in Shanksville, Pennsylvania . 13

Testimonies were revealed from the planes themselves, in which the hijackers had taken control of them using simple knives with which they killed flight attendants and at least one pilot or passenger. According to the investigations of the 9/11 Commission , there is also evidence that some type of aerosol was used to retain passengers in the first class cabin. Likewise, the presence of a bomb was threatened in three of the planes; it was not so on the American Airlines 77. According to the conclusions of this commission, it is thought that the bomb notices were probably false. 14


FEMA graphic showing the impacts on the Twin Towers of both planes, and the trajectory (and point of impact on the street) followed by the landing gear, and one of the engines.
On the fourth plane, the black box revealed that the passengers, after learning that the other planes had been deliberately crashed, tried to regain control of the aircraft, to which the hijackers reacted by moving the plane in an unsuccessful attempt to subdue passengers. According to the 9-1-1 recording, one of the passengers, Todd Beamer , asked the person he was talking to on the phone to pray with him and at the end simply said " let's roll . " Shortly afterward, the plane crashed in a field near Shanksville , Pennsylvania ., at 10:03.11 am local time. There is debate about the exact moment the plane hit the ground, as seismic records record the impact at 10:06 am. Later captured Al Qaeda leader Khalid Shaikh Mohammed or Khalid Sheikh Mohammed said that Flight 93 was targeting the United States Congress .

The expression "let's roll" became widely used in the United States after the attacks. Neil Young composed a song with that title as a tribute to the victims. For her part, Beamer's widow patented the phrase as a trademark. fifteen

The attacks spread confusion throughout the United States. All kinds of unconfirmed and contradictory news and reports were published throughout the day. One of the most persistent was that a car bomb had exploded at the headquarters of the United States Department of State , the Truman Building in Washington DC . This false news went through the news agencies and was published by several newspapers that day. Another report released by the Associated Press agency stated that flight 1989, a Delta Air Lines Boeing 767had also been kidnapped. The news also turned out to be a mistake; the aircraft had briefly been considered at risk of hijacking but eventually responded to air traffic controllers, landing safely at Cleveland , Ohio Airport . 16

9/11 timeline
Main article: Timeline of the September 11, 2001 attacks

09:02. Moment of the second impact against the South Tower. This attack is watched live by millions of people on television.

09:39. Video released by the US Government of the moment of impact against the Pentagon of American Airlines flight 77.

10:28. The North Tower collapses. The Twin Towers disappear from the New York skyline and become Ground Zero .
Time is set to local daylight saving time in the Eastern United States ( EDT ). To establish universal time ( UTC ), four hours must be added to the local time.

0800: American Airlines Flight 11 , a Boeing 767 with 92 people on board, takes off from Boston Logan International Airport for Los Angeles . 17
08:14: United Airlines Flight 175 , a Boeing 767 with 65 people on board, takes off from Boston Logan International Airport for Los Angeles . 17
08.19: Stewardess Betty Ong of American Airlines Flight 11 contacts the company's reservations office to report that the plane appears to be being hijacked. 18
08:21: American Airlines Flight 77 , a Boeing 757 with 64 people on board, takes off from Washington DC Dulles International Airport for Los Angeles . 17
08.37: The FAA (The Federal Aeronautical Administration) notifies NORAD ( North American Aerospace Defense Command , North American Air Defense Command) that there is a suspicion of hijacking of American Flight 11. 18
0841: United Airlines Flight 93 , a Boeing 757 with 44 people on board, takes off from Newark International Airport for San Francisco . 17
084630: American Flight 11 fully embeds itself in the North Tower of the World Trade Center (WTC).
02/09/59: United Flight 175 rams the South Tower of the World Trade Center. The event is covered live by various television cameras that focused on the Twin Towers because of the dense smoke that rose from the North Tower.
09.03: The FAA notifies NORAD that there is a suspected hijacking of United Flight 175. 18
09.07: The White House Chief of Staff advises President George W. Bush that the second tower has been hit and that the United States is under attack. The president was meeting with some children from an elementary school in Sarasota , Florida . 19
09.08: The FAA bans all takeoffs into or over New York space. 17
09.10-09.25: Richard Clarke , head of the counter-terrorism office, organizes a video conference from the White House between the highest military leaders to organize the response. twenty
09.21: all tunnels and bridges on the island of Manhattan are closed. 17
09.26: The FAA prohibits the takeoff of all civil aircraft. 17
09.31: President George W. Bush makes a speech from the elementary school where he is, reporting that it is apparently a terrorist act. 17
0934: The FAA notifies NORAD that there is a suspected hijacking of American Flight 77. 18
9:34 a.m.: President George W. Bush leaves Sarasota Elementary School for the airport. 19
093946 – American Flight 77 crashes into the Pentagon .
0945: The FAA (with orders from the President) orders all aircraft in flight to land immediately at the nearest airport. 17
0948: Congress and the White House are evacuated. 17
0957: President Bush leaves Florida . 17
9:59 a.m.: South Tower collapses.
10.03.11 – United Flight 93 goes down in open field at Shanksville, Pennsylvania . Apparently, there would have been a fight between the crew and passengers with the hijackers to regain control of the device.
10:06: The FAA notifies NORAD that there is a suspected hijacking of United Flight 93. 18
10:28 a.m.: North Tower falls.
11.04: the United Nations building in New York is evacuated. 17
11:45 a.m.: President Bush touches down at Barksdale Air Force Base in Louisiana . twenty-one
04.13: President Bush declares "High Alert" worldwide and addresses the nation via the media from Barksdale Air Force Base . twenty-one
1:37 PM: President Bush leaves Air Force One at Barksdale Air Force Base. 17
2:51 PM: Navy sends missile-armed destroyers to New York. 17
7:07 PM: President Bush lands at Offutt Air Force Base, Nebraska . 17
4:36 PM: President Bush leaves Air Force One at Offutt Air Force Base and orders to be taken to the White House . 17
5:25 p.m.: The 47-story building 7 of the World Trade Center collapses. 17
7:00 p.m.: President Bush arrives at the White House. 17
8:30 p.m.: President Bush addresses the nation from the Oval Office at the White House. 17
victims
Body count
New York	World Trade Center	2602 dead and 24 missing 22 23
American Airlines Flight 11	93 22
United Airlines Flight 175	64 22
The Pentagon	Edifice	125 22
American Airlines Flight 77	64 22
Pennsylvania	United Airlines Flight 93	44 22
Total	2992 dead and 24 missing
*Including the 19 kidnappers
Deaths numbered in the thousands, with exactly 2,992 dying, including 246 killed in the four crashed planes (none of the occupants of the hijacked planes survived), 2,602 in New York, killed both inside the twin towers and at the base of the themselves, and 125 dead inside the Pentagon building. The victims included 343 firefighters from the New York Fire Department , 23 police officers from the city's police department, and 37 police officers from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. 24 25 As of today, there are still 24 more people on the list of disappeared. 26

According to figures presented by the Department of Health in January 2002, 247 Latin Americans were among those killed in the Al-Qaeda terrorist attack against the Twin Towers, representing 9% of the total. Of these, 25 were nationals of the Dominican Republic , 18 from Colombia , 13 from Ecuador , 6 from Cuba , 4 from Argentina , 27 2 from Venezuela and 1 from Chile . In other places, there is talk of 15 dead from Mexico , as well as others from El Salvador , Honduras , Jamaica , Peru , Paraguay , 28 Uruguay and Guyana .

The attacks were the largest terrorist attack against the United States of America , surpassing the Oklahoma City bombing by far-right terrorists Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols that caused 168 deaths, and the attacks carried out by Al-Qaeda cells. in 1998 against US embassies in the African countries of Kenya and Tanzania .

survivors
According to the 9/11 Commission, approximately 16,000 people were in the impact zones of the World Trade Center complex at the time of the attacks. The vast majority of them survived, thanks to the evacuation efforts before the collapse of the towers.

The Barcelonan Alicia Esteve posed as a survivor of the attack. She adopted a false identity ( Tania Head ) and even became president of the World Trade Center Disaster Survivors Network. Thanks to The New York Times his fraud was discovered; 29 and thanks to the Spanish newspaper La Vanguardia his true identity was revealed. 30

The collapse of the World Trade Center

Buildings around the World Trade Center seriously damaged by the collapse of the Twin Towers. September 17, 2001.

Aerial photo of Ground Zero with the original location of the buildings.
Three buildings in the World Trade Center complex collapsed due to structural failure on the day of the attacks. The South Tower fell at 9:59 a.m. local time in New York, after burning for 56 minutes in a fire caused by the impact of United Airlines Flight 175 at 9:03 a.m. The North Tower fell at 10:28 a.m., after burning for approximately 102 minutes in a fire caused by the impact of American Airlines Flight 11 at 8:46 a.m. A third building, the 7 World Trade Center , collapsed at 5:20 p.m., apparently having been heavily damaged by debris from the falling Twin Towers, along with a series of fires. 31 32Numerous buildings adjacent to the complex also sustained substantial damage, caught fire and had to be demolished. The Deutsche Bank building is the only large structure to be damaged and fired at ground zero that as of 2006 had not yet been fully demolished. Demolition took place in February 2011. 33 [ update ]

A federal technical building and safety investigation of the World Trade Center and WTC 7 collapses was conducted by the US Department of Commerce 's National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) . The objectives of this investigation, which took into account the construction of the building, the materials used, and the technical conditions that contributed to the collapse, were considered fulfilled on April 6 , 2005 . The research established a series of bases for:

Improve the criteria with which buildings are designed, built, maintained and used
Improved tools and guidance for the construction industry and safety officers
Reviews of building fire regulations, standards and practices
Public Safety Improvements
The report concludes that the fire protection of the Twin Towers ' steel infrastructures was dislodged with the initial impact of the planes and that, if this had not occurred, the towers would probably have remained upright. The fires weakened the trussesthat supported the floors, and caused the floors to sag. In turn, the sagging floors pulled on the exterior steel columns to the point that the exterior columns bowed inward. With the damage to the main columns, the twisted exterior columns could not support the weight of the buildings, causing the collapse. In addition, the report states that the stairwells in the towers were not adequately reinforced to provide an emergency exit for people above the impact zones. NIST stated that the final report on the WTC 7 collapse would appear in a separate report. 3. 4

Apart from the collapse of the Twin Towers and WTC 7 , 23 other buildings were damaged. Currently the area occupied by the material remains of the Twin Towers is known as Ground Zero . The building was officially inaugurated on November 3, 2014. 35

Damage

September 13, 2001 : A New York firefighter surveys what remains of the South Tower.
Apart from the two twin towers of 110 floors each, five World Trade Center buildings were destroyed or seriously damaged, including the WTC building 7 and the Marriott hotel , four stations of the New York subway and the Orthodox Christian Church of St. Nicholas. In total, 25 buildings in Manhattan were damaged and seven buildings in the World Trade Center business complex were razed to the ground. Later the Deutsche Bank Building located on Liberty street and the Borough of Manhattan Community College 's Fiterman Hall at 30 West Broadwaythey had to be demolished due to the state they were left in, which made them uninhabitable. Currently, 36 are waiting to be rebuilt . Various communications equipment was also damaged. Without going any further, the telecommunications antennas of the North Tower fell with its collapse, while other radio antennas of neighboring towers were also seriously damaged.

In Arlington County , a portion of the Pentagon was severely damaged by fire and aircraft impact. After a while, an entire section of the building collapsed.

The kidnappers

The Statue of Liberty and, in the background, the "twin towers" of the World Trade Center burning before collapsing.

The North Tower fire seen from the street.

Debris from the World Trade Center .
19 Arab men boarded the four planes, five on each except United Airlines Flight 93 , which had four hijackers. Of the attackers, 15 were from Saudi Arabia , two were from the United Arab Emirates , one was from Egypt , and one was from Lebanon . In general, they were educated people from wealthy families. 37

The full list is:

On American Airlines Flight 11 :

Mohammed Atta ( Egyptian and alleged pilot)
Waleed al-Shehri ( saudi )
Wail al-Shehri (Saudi)
Abdulaziz al-Omari (Saudi)
Satam al-Suqami (Saudi)
On United Airlines Flight 175 :

Marwan al-Shehhi ( Emirati and alleged pilot)
Fayez Banihammad (Emirati)
Mohand al-Shehri (Saudi)
Hamza al-Ghamdi (saudí)
Ahmed al-Ghamdi (@saudí)
On American Airlines Flight 77 :

Hani Hanjour (Saudi and alleged pilot)
Khalid al-Mihdhar (Saudi)
Majed Moqed (Saudi)
Nawaf al-Hazmi (Saudi)
Salem al-Hazmi (Saudi)
On United Airlines Flight 93 :

Ziad Jarrah ( Lebanese )
Ahmed al-Haznawi (Saudi)
Ahmed al-Nami (Saudi)
Saeed al-Ghamdi (@saudí)
Other potential hijackers
27 members of the terrorist organization Al-Qaeda tried to enter the United States to take part in the attack. Ultimately, only 19 participated. The other eight are often called "the 20th hijacker":

Ramzi Binalshibh allegedly wanted to be part of the attacks, but was denied a visa to enter the country.
Mohamed al-Kahtani , a Saudi Arabian national, may also have planned to join the kidnappers, but US Immigration Service authorities at Orlando International Airport denied him entry into the country. He was subsequently captured in Afghanistan and taken prisoner at Guantánamo .
Zacarias Moussaoui was reportedly considered as a possible replacement for Ziad Jarrah when the latter threatened to leave due to tensions between the hijackers. Supposedly, the Al-Qaeda hierarchy did not trust him and the idea was scrapped. He was arrested on August 16 , 2001four weeks before the immigration attacks, though FBI agents believed he had violent intent. He had received flight training that same year. In April 2005, Moussaoui pleaded guilty to conspiring to hijack planes and participating in Al-Qaeda, but denied any knowledge of the 9/11 attacks. Moussaoui claimed in March 2006 that under the personal direction of Osama bin Laden, and in collaboration with Richard Reid , he was to hijack a fifth plane and crash it into the White House . 38
His defense attorneys said it was a fantasy by Moussaoui, who was never an Al-Qaeda operative. In a May 2006 video , Osama bin Laden claimed that Moussaoui had no connection to the events of 9/11, and that he knew because "I was responsible for the trust of the 19 brothers who carried out the attack." 39

The 3 of maypole of 2006 , a federal jury rejected the death penalty for defendants and sentenced them to 6 life terms in prison without parole. 40

At his trial, FBI agent Greg Jones testified that prior to the attacks he had already warned his supervisor , Michael Maltbie , to "prevent Zacarias Moussaoui from crashing a plane into the World Trade Center." Maltbie had refused to act on 70 requests from another agent, Harry Samit , so he could search Moussaoui's computer.

Other Al-Qaeda members who tried to participate but failed included Saeed al-Ghamdi (not to be confused with the hijacker of the same name who did intervene), Mushabib al-Hamlan , Zakariyah Essabar , Ali Abdul Aziz Ali , and Tawfiq bin Attash . According to the 9/11 Commission Report , Khalid Sheikh Mohammed , mastermind of the attack, wanted to kick out at least one member of the team ( Khalid al-Mihdhar ) but Osama bin Laden objected.

attacks with anthrax

Anthrax letter sent to Senator Daschle. The message read: “11-09-01. You can't stop us. We have anthrax. You die now. Are you scared? Death to the United States. Death to Israel. Allah is great." The letter was processed by the Brentwood (Washington DC) postal center where two postal workers died due to anthrax inhalation, Joseph Curseen Jr. and Thomas Morris Jr.
Main article: Anthrax attacks in 2001
A week after 9/11, a series of terrorist attacks began using anthrax , a deadly bacterium. Over the course of several weeks, terrorists used the mail to expose journalists, politicians, and civilian employees in New York, New Jersey , Washington DC , and Florida to anthrax . A total of 22 people were contaminated with anthrax, of which five died.

These attacks accentuated citizen insecurity and the climate of terror produced by the September 11 attacks.

The perpetrators of the attacks could never be identified. US Vice President Dick Cheney stated that he would not be surprised to find Osama bin Laden behind these attacks and argued that:

The only way to show responsibility is to act considering that there could be a link. We know that bin Laden has tried over the years to obtain weapons of mass destruction, both biological and chemical. 41

While US law enforcement agencies were unable to identify the terrorists, Attorney General John Ashcroft listed Dr. Steven Hatfill as a potentially related "person of interest," although no charges were filed against him.

The spores were later shown to have come from a US Army laboratory . 42 43

Long-term effects
economic effects
The attacks had a significant impact on US and world markets. The Federal Reserve temporarily reduced its contacts with banks due to the lack of equipment lost in the financial district of New York. Within hours, control over the money supply was recovered, with the consequent liquidity for the banks. The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), American Stock Exchange and NASDAQ stock indices did not open on September 11 and remained closed until 3:30 p.m. on September 17. The NYSE's systems were not damaged by the attack, but damage to the telephone networks of the World Trade Center financial system prevented it from functioning.

When markets reopened on September 17, 2001 , after the biggest slowdown since the Great Depression , the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 684 points (7.1%), to 8,920, its biggest single-day drop. At the end of the week, the Dow Jones had lost 1369.7 points (14.3%), its biggest drop in a week. Since then , Wall Street has been protected against a terrorist attack.


Manhattan under smoke after the attack, seen from space.
The economy of Lower Manhattan , America's third economic district, was devastated. 30% of the office floor (2.7 million m³), ​​much of it class A, was destroyed or damaged. The Deutsche Bank building , a neighbor of the Twin Towers, had to be closed due to damage and demolished. Electricity, telephone and gas were cut off. People were restricted from entering Soho and Lower Manhattan. The relocation of many of the jobs previously located here to Midtown and New Jersey accelerated. Several opinions affirm that the tax revenues of the area will not be recovered. 44

Reconstruction has faced lack of agreement on priorities. For example, Mayor Bloomberg made New York's bid for the 2012 Olympics the centerpiece of his 2002-2005 development plan, while Governor Pataki has delegated the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation , heavily criticized for the few achievements obtained with the ample funds received. 45 46 Construction of a new office complex began in 2006 on the adjoining building sites ( 7 World Trade Center ). One World Trade CenterIt was completed in 2014 and stands at 541 m tall, making it the tallest building in New York City . Three more towers were built on the eastern side of the World Trade Center, which were completed between 2007 and 2012.

The air sector losses were significant: US airspace was closed for several days for the first time in its history, and in several countries such as Canada. 47 After its reopening, the airlines suffered a decrease in their traffic. It is estimated that the business lost 20% of its size, and the financial problems of US airlines worsened, leading to an economic crisis. 48

2008 economic crisis;
Main article: Economic crisis of 2008–2015
After the attacks of September 11, 2001, the US opted for the deregulation of the markets, the reduction of taxes and interest rates and the expansion of credit, causing a real estate bubble in the so-called subprime mortgages . 49 To this we had to add the multimillion-dollar expenses in the war in Afghanistan 50 and the war in Iraq 51 that could cost from 2 billion dollars to 6 billion in total. The bubble finally began to unravel in August 2007 and crashed brutally in September 2008 when Lehman Brothers bank failed .

Impact of 9/11 on the economy
The US economy entered a phase of recession since 2001 as a result of insecurity and growing mistrust in security in the Western world after a decade of virtually uninterrupted growth, despite the fact that economic activity had already shown signs of exhaustion since 1998 , effect of the Asian crisis , with the loss of more than a million jobs in the industrial sector between 1999 and 2000 .

The terrorist attacks aggravated the situation by sharply reducing consumption as a result of the population 's state of psychosis , which avoided visiting crowded places or traveling. The air sector was one of the most affected, as the demand for commercial flights was drastically reduced, mainly due to the fear of a repetition of terrorist actions, and also to the resistance of the public to submit to the rigorous security measures in the airports . In an attempt to alleviate this situation, Congress approved a $15 billion financial package for the airline industry, while the Bush administrationadvanced an additional tax cut to revitalize consumption; this measure had negative effects on the budget, already diminished by the expenses of the war. 52


Smoke around the World Trade Center, as seen by weather radar .
Potential health effect
The thousands of tons of toxic debris resulting from the collapse of the Twin Towers are made up of: 50% non-fibrous material and construction debris; 41% glass and fiber; 9.2% cellulose and 0.8% asbestos , 53 lead and mercury . In addition, unprecedented levels of dioxins and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons were released in the fires that burned over the next three months. 54 This has caused several illnesses in rescue and reconstruction teams working at ground zero, including the death of agent James Zadroga. 55The effects have also extended to the health of the inhabitants of Lower Manhattan and nearby Chinatown . 56 According to scientific speculation, exposure to various toxic products and pollutants in the air surrounding the Towers after the collapse of the WTC could have negative effects on fetal development. 57

Because of this potential risk, a notable children's health center is currently testing the children of mothers who were pregnant during the WTC collapse and who lived or worked near the towers. The staff of this study evaluate the children using psychological tests every year and interview the mothers every six months. The purpose of the study is to determine if there are significant differences in the development and health of children of mothers who were exposed to toxic products, compared to children whose mothers were not exposed to contamination. 58

In May 2007, New York Chief Medical Examiner Charls F. Hirst admitted that the death of a lawyer was due to exposure to the toxic cloud, which was the first official acknowledgment of a death as a result of the dust after the fall of the Twin Towers. Stating that: "Almost certainly, beyond a reasonable doubt, exposure to dust from the World Trade Center contributed to Dunn-Jones's death" . A total of 7,300 workers from ground zero filed a complaint and demand compensation from the city for exposure to and handling of toxic substances from the Towers. 59

Authorship
Responsibilities
Al Qaeda involvement

Ground zero, still on fire.
The FBI , working with the United States Department of Justice , identified 19 deceased hijackers in just 72 hours. Few had tried to hide their names or credit cards, and they were almost the only Arab passengers on the flights. Thus, the FBI was able to determine their names and in many cases details, such as date of birth, known or possible residences, visa status , and the specific identity of the suspected pilots. 60 The FBI released photos of the 19 hijackers, along with information on possible nationalities and nicknames. 61

The United States Government investigations included the FBI 's PENTTBOM operation , the largest in history with more than 7,000 agents involved. The results of this determined that al-Qaeda and Osama bin Laden were responsible for the attacks. Studies commissioned by the British government reached the same conclusion. 62 His declaration of a holy war against the United States, and a fatwa signed by bin Laden and others calling for the killing of US civilians in 1998 from Afghanistan , are considered by many to be evidence of his motivation to commit these acts.

On September 16, 2001 , Bin Laden denied any involvement in the attacks by reading a statement that was broadcast by the Qatari satellite channel Al Jazeera and later broadcast on numerous US networks: 63

"I insist that I did not carry out this act, which appears to have been carried out by individuals with their own motives."

Osama Bin Laden
However, in November 2001, US forces found a home videotape of a destroyed house in Jalalabad , Afghanistan, in which Osama bin Laden talks with Khaled al-Harbi . 64 In various sections of the tape, such as in the paragraph quoted below, bin Laden acknowledges planning the attacks:

We calculate in advance the number of enemy casualties, which would die due to their location in the tower. We calculated that the floors that had to be rammed were three or four floors. I was the most optimistic of all (inaudible) due to my experience in this field. I thought that the gasoline fire in the plane would melt the iron frame of the building and only cause the area where the plane hit and the floors above to collapse. That was all we expected. 65

On December 27, 2001 , another video of bin Laden was released in which he states:

The West in general, and the US in particular, have an unspeakable hatred for Islam... Terrorism against the US is beneficial and justified. 66

Shortly before the 2004 US presidential election, in a video statement, bin Laden publicly acknowledged al-Qaeda's responsibility for the US bombings, and admitted his direct involvement in the attacks. He said that the attacks were carried out because:...we are free people who do not accept injustice, and we want to recover the freedom of our nation. [ citation needed ]

In an audiotape broadcast on Al Jazeera on May 21, 2006 , bin Laden said that he personally led the 19 hijackers. 67 Another video obtained by Al Jazeera in September 2006 shows Osama bin Laden with Ramzi Binalshibh , as well as two hijackers, Hamza al-Ghamdi and Wail al-Shehri , making preparations for the attacks. 68

The National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Against the United States was formed by the United States government and is commonly known as the 9/11 Commission . He published his report on July 22, 2004 , concluding that the attacks were conceived and carried out by members of al-Qaeda. The Commission's report states that:

The 9/11 plotters ultimately spent between $400,000 and $500,000 USD to plan and conduct their attack, but the specific origins of the money used to carry out the attacks remain unknown. 69

On September 11, 2007, bin Laden issued another statement in which he said: "I call the pilots of the planes heroes" [ citation needed ]

Support groups within the United States
About 1,200 foreigners have been secretly arrested and jailed in connection with the investigation of the 9/11 attacks, although the exact number has not been released by the government. 70

The methods used by the state to investigate and detain suspects have been severely criticized by human rights organizations such as Human Rights Watch 71 and heads of government such as German Chancellor Angela Merkel . 72

So far, the United States government has not found any of the conspirators who carried out the operations on the ground.

A support cell in Spain
On September 26, 2005, the National Court of Spain led by Judge Baltasar Garzón sentenced Abu Dahdah to 27 years in prison for conspiracy in the 9/11 attacks and for being part of the terrorist organization Al Qaeda. At the same time, 17 other al Qaeda members were sentenced to between 6 and 12 years. 73 74 On February 16, 2006, the Supreme Court reduced Abu Dahdah's sentence to 12 years because it considered that his participation in the conspiracy was not proven. 75

Reasons
According to the findings of official US government investigations, the attacks were in compliance with al-Qaeda 's stated intent , expressed in the 1998 fatwa of Osama bin Laden , Ayman al-Zawahiri , Abu-Yasir Rifa'i Ahmad Taha , Shaykh Mir Hamzah , and Fazlur Rahman ( Emir of the Bangladesh Jihadist Movement , Fazlur Rahman ). 76

The fatwa listing the three "crimes and sins" committed by the Americans in the opinion of its authors contained the following motives for the attacks:

US military support for Israel .
Military occupation of the Arabian Peninsula by the US.
American aggression against the people of Iraq .
In the same fatwa it was established that the United States:

Plunder the resources of the Arabian Peninsula .
It dictates the policy to be followed by the rulers of these countries.
Support abusive regimes and monarchies that oppress their own people.
It has military bases and installations on the Arabian Peninsula, thereby violating its Holy Land , in order to frighten neighboring states.
It tries to divide the Arab states in order to weaken them as a political force.
He supports Israel, and wants to distract world opinion from the occupation of the Palestinian Territories .
The First Gulf War , the subsequent embargo on Iraq , and the bombing of that country by the United States are cited in the 1998 fatwa as evidence for these allegations. To the disapproval of moderate Muslims, the fatwa cites Islamic texts as calling for violent action against the US military and citizens until the alleged grievances are remedied: stating that " ulema throughout history have agreed that Jihad is an individual duty if enemies destroy Muslim countries."

Recorded al Qaeda statements after 9/11 confirmed US assumptions about authorship. In a 2004 video, apparently acknowledging responsibility for the attacks, bin Laden claims that the 1982 Lebanon War , for which he holds the United States responsible, prompted him to carry out the attacks. In the video, bin Laden also claims that with them he wanted to "restore our nation's freedom," to "punish the aggressor" and inflict damage on the US economy. He declared that one of the goals of his holy war was to "bleed the United States to bankruptcy ." 77 Bin Laden also said:

"We swore that Americans will not live safely until we live in Palestine. This has shown the reality of the United States, which puts the interests of Israel above those of its own people. The United States will get nothing out of this crisis until it leaves the Arabian Peninsula and cease its support of Israel."

The 9/11 Commission report finds that Khalid Shaikh Mohammed 's animosity toward the United States , the main architect of the attacks, stemmed "not from his experiences as a student, but from his violent disagreement with US foreign policy in favor of Israel." . The same motives have been attributed to the two pilots who crashed in the WTC: Mohamed Atta , who was described by Ralph Bodenstein (his work and travel companion) as "mainly imbued by the protection of the United States of the Israeli policies in the region". Marwan al-Shehhi is said to have explained his mood with the words "how can people laugh when people are dying in Palestine?" 78

In contrast to these conclusions, the Bush administration reduced the motives for the attack to "hatred of freedom and democracy, exemplified by the United States."

According to counterterrorism expert Richard A. Clarke , internal conflicts in the Muslim world are the cause of the 9/11 attacks. Specifically, bin Laden and other residents of Saudi Arabia and Egypt believe that most governments in the Middle East are apostates , 79 not following their model of Islamic piety, since neither is a caliphate . Inspired by the Egyptian theologian Sayyid Qutb , Bin Laden and his followers believe that it is a duty for Muslims to establish a caliphate in the Middle East. 80

Starting from those beliefs, Bin Laden devised a plan to establish this caliphate, beginning with an attack on the United States. This would provoke them to increase military and economic pressure on the Middle East, 81 thus uniting all Muslims. The popular religious wave would lead conservative Muslims to take control. 82

According to Michale Doran, this goal is demonstrated by bin Laden's frequent use of "spectacular" in his statements. According to his hypothesis, Bin Laden hoped to provoke a visceral and emotional reaction from the United States, in order to secure a counter-response from Arab citizens. 83

The American response

Then - President of the United States , George W. Bush , on October 1, 2001 at the FEMA office in Washington DC .

Aerial photo of the United Airlines Flight 93 crash site .
Search for survivors, recovery of bodies and compensation
In the hours following the attacks, a large-scale search and rescue operation was launched with more than 350 specially trained dogs. 84 Only a few badly injured survivors were found, and in the weeks that followed it became clear that no more were to be found.

The recovery of bodies took months. Simply putting out all the fires burning in the rubble took weeks, while the complete removal of rubble was not completed until May 2002. Provisional lookouts were installed to observe the work of the crews, which were removed on May 30 , 2002 .

Likewise, many fundraisers were started to help the victims of the attacks and the relatives of the deceased. Once the deadline for requesting compensation had expired ( September 11, 2003 ) , 2,833 people had received the payment. 85

public response
The September 11 attacks had an overwhelming effect on the population. The bodies and security forces (known as "the first responders") that intervened in the rescue and relief efforts, especially the firefighters, were hailed as heroes. Police and rescue team members from across the country converged on New York to recover bodies. The blood donations boomed. 86

Another less laudable supposedly patriotic response was the increase in racism and harassment against people of Arab origin . Other groups originating in the Middle East were frequently confused with Arabs and victims of this xenophobia , particularly Sikhs , who have a tradition of wearing turbans, a sign that is usually associated with Islam in the West . Balbir Singh Sodhi was shot dead on September 15, mistaken for a Muslim. At least 8 other people suffered the same fate. 87

Politically, the population gave massive support to the government in its anti-terrorist work. Thus, the approval rating of President George W. Bush reached 86%. 88 On September 20, the president addressed the nation and the joint session of the United States Congress , explaining the day's events, his administration's actions in the intervening 9 days, and his response plans. New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani was hailed both in New York and across the country for his reaction to the terrorist catastrophe. 89

Internal security measures in the United States
Following the attacks, the fingerprints of 80,000 Arabs and Muslims were registered under the Alien Registration Act of 1940. 8,000 of them were interviewed and 5,000 aliens were detained under United States Congress Joint Resolution 107-40, which authorized the use of military force to stop and prevent international terrorism in the United States. 90

Because of the attacks, public opinion focused mainly on national security, and a new cabinet-level federal agency, the United States Department of Homeland Security , was even created , thus reorganizing the fight against terrorism.

The USA PATRIOT Act was also approved , suspending and limiting some freedoms and constitutional rights in order to increase the internal security of the United States. This measure has been harshly criticized by civil rights defenders, who see in it a violation of citizens' privacy, as well as a relaxation of judicial control over intelligence bodies.

9/11 was also the argument used by the Bush administration to launch a new operation by the National Security Agency with the aim of recording the communications of US citizens abroad. 91

The changes in the daily life of the population and the demand for a direct commitment to security have been considerable. Posters and loudspeakers have been placed in each means of transport that repeat the slogan "If you see something, say something" ( "if you see something, say something" ). 92


9/11 Commission Report
9/11 Commission
The National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States , chaired by former New Jersey Governor Thomas Kean , was formed in late 2002 to prepare a complete report on the attacks and the circumstances related to them, including from the preparation to the immediate response of the US authorities. Said report was finally published on July 22 , 2004 .

international repercussions
The attacks had global ramifications. Governments, associations and the media condemned him throughout the world. 93 Especially famous was the headline of the French newspaper Le Monde : Nous sommes tous Américains (We Are All Americans) -Referring to the United States- 94

After the attacks, the Bush administration declared the so-called war against terrorism , with the objectives of bringing Osama Bin Laden and al-Qaeda to justice and preventing the action of anti-American terrorist networks . These objectives would be achieved through economic and military sanctions against states perceived as protectors of terrorists and by increasing global surveillance and intelligence.

About a month after the attacks, the United States of America, with the assistance of an international coalition, invaded Afghanistan , whose government had supported Al-Qaeda forces. 95 Particularly important was the support of the Pakistani government , which after the attacks aligned itself with the United States, giving it bases for the war in Afghanistan and arresting more than 600 suspected collaborators with al-Qaeda. 96

international response
Following 9/11, many governments passed anti-terrorism laws or tightened existing ones, particularly in the face of Islamic terrorism. These included the United Kingdom , Spain , India , Australia , France , Germany , Indonesia , China , Canada , Russia , Pakistan , Jordan , Mauritius , Uganda and Zimbabwe . 97 One consequence of these measures was the freezing of bank accounts associated with Al-Qaeda. 98

The security and intelligence services of various countries ( Italy , Malaysia , Indonesia , the Philippines ...) arrested people linked to various al-Qaeda cells after the attacks. 99 100

These measures have been the subject of various criticisms, which see them as an attack on individual freedoms, as a reduction of rights and, in general, as an increase in the interference of the State in the privacy of citizens.

Particularly well-known is the Guantanamo detention camp , a US base in Cuba, where numerous prisoners captured as " illegal combatants " are held. This center, criticized by Amnesty International , the European Union , the UN and numerous other organizations, has been repeatedly denounced as a violation of Human Rights .


Soldiers of the US Army 10th Mountain Division in Afghanistan .
afghanistan war
Main article: War in Afghanistan (2001–present)
The first step taken by the United States in the War on Terrorism was the invasion of Afghanistan on October 7, 2001 by NATO and Northern Alliance forces with the support of the United Nations , given the refusal of the ruling Taliban regime to hand over Osama bin Laden, who had allegedly taken refuge in that country.

On November 13, 2001, the capital Kabul was taken by the Northern Alliance and the government was left in the hands of the US/NATO and the Northern Alliance. Since then Al Qaeda and the Taliban have united and reorganized as a guerrilla insurgent. [ citation needed ]

On May 2 , 2011, bin Laden was killed by elite US troops in Pakistan .


A group of US Marines prepare to enter one of Saddam Hussein's palaces in Baghdad on April 9 , 2003 .
Iraq war
Main article: Iraq War
The second step in the US War on Terror was the March 20, 2003 invasion of Iraq . This military action was carried out by the United States and Great Britain without authorization from the United Nations. In addition, Spain, Italy and other countries allied with the US in this action and sent humanitarian aid to the area. The United States argued that the invasion was necessary because Iraq possessed hidden weapons of mass destruction . The invasion triggered a war, with hundreds of deaths, and caused the overthrow of the government led by Saddam Hussein on April 9, 2003 .. Once the country was controlled, no weapons of mass destruction were found. The United States then argued that the reason for the invasion was because there was information from the intelligence services that led to the assumption that Saddam Hussein had secret relations with Al-Qaeda. Recent reports indicate that there was never a relationship between Hussein and Al-Qaeda, and President Bush tried to link Iraq to the war on terror. 101

Since then, several Iraqi groups opposed to the invasion have organized a resistance movement that has been very active in carrying out attacks against military targets. At the same time, after the invasion, Al Qaeda has also been able to establish itself in Iraq, where it basically carries out attacks of a terrorist nature. [ citation needed ]

To this day, the consequences continue as an "undeclared" sectarian civil war has broken out, resulting in the death of more than 34,000 civilians (in 2006 alone, according to the UN) and according to UNHCR figures, there are 1, 7 million internally displaced Iraqis and another two million who have fled to neighboring countries. Furthermore, as of June 2007, US Army casualties amount to more than 4,000 dead.

Tributes

The World Trade Center in December 2005.
In the days following the attack, several reconnaissances were carried out around the world. 102 103 104 Many people posted pictures of the dead and missing at Ground Zero. A witness stated that "I was not able to forget the faces of the innocent victims who were murdered. Their photos are everywhere, in telephone booths, traffic lights, subway station walls. Everything reminds me of a huge funeral, with people quiet and sad, but also very kind. Before, New York used to make me feel cold; now people reach out to help each other." 105

One of the earliest memorials was the Tribute in Light , the installation of eighty-eight searchlights on the site where the Twin Towers stood, projecting two vertical columns of light skyward. 106 In New York, a competition was held to design the most appropriate memorial for the location. 107 The winning design, Reflecting Absence , was chosen in August 2006, and consists of a pair of reflecting pools where the towers used to stand, surrounded by a list of the names of the victims in an underground memorial space. 108 Plans to place a museum on the same site have been put on hold, due to the abandonment of theInternational Freedom Center as a result of protests by the families of several victims. 109

On September 20 of the same year, a song called The Last Goodbye was published , written by Emilio Estefan Jr. and Gian Marco , in which more than 60 artists gathered as a sign of alliance, among which the following stand out: Ricky Martin , Alejandro Sanz , Thalía , Gloria Estefan , Juan Luis Guerra , Celia Cruz , Olga Tañón , etc.


The Tribute in Light memorial , honoring the victims of the World Trade Center attacks, in 2004.
On the seventh anniversary of the attacks, September 11, 2008, construction was completed and the Pentagon Memorial was opened to the public . 110 111 It consists of a park with 184 benches facing the Pentagon. 112 When the building was repaired, between 2001 and 2002, a private chapel and internal memorial were included, located at the point where Flight 77 crashed. 113

In Shanksville, a National Flight 93 Memorial is planned to include a circle of trees surrounding the area where the plane crashed, with forty carillons bearing the names of the victims. 114 Until the new memorial is inaugurated, a temporary one is located 457 meters from the crash. 115 New York City Firefighters donated a memorial to the Shanksville Volunteer Fire Department. It is a cross made of steel from the World Trace Center, on a platform in the shape of the Pentagon. 116 It was installed in front of the fire station on August 25, 2008. 117

Permanent memorials are being built in many other places, and the families of the victims, numerous organizations and public figures have created various scholarship programs and foundations to raise funds. 118

On each anniversary, in New York City, the names of the victims who died there are read, with funeral music in the background. The President of the United States, meanwhile, attends a memorial service at the Pentagon. 119 Smaller services are held in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, often attended by the First Lady.

The Wikimedia Foundation also opened a wiki dedicated to the attacks, 120 which was closed on September 15, 2006.


View in which the monument can be seen in the foreground, made of some rubble, located in Jersey City, New Jersey - United States, and further back the buildings in Manhattan, between which the twin towers stood. (photo taken in July 2007)
conspiracy hypotheses

World Trade Center Cross .
Main article: 9/11 conspiracies
Since the attacks, several hypotheses have emerged that are usually grouped under the name of conspiracy theories , which maintain that the conclusions reached in the official investigation are not consistent with the facts.

In general, these theories question the possibility that a Boeing 757 had rammed the Pentagon; that the Twin Towers or Tower No. 7 of the World Trade Center could have collapsed as they did as a result of the impact of the planes, and not as a result of the placement of explosive charges, in a remote-controlled demolition; that on United flight 93 there had been a confrontation between the passengers and the terrorists, etc. In general, these authors claim to have found inconsistencies that cast doubt on the entire government version. Some of the supposed inconsistencies that the critics mention would be the fact that, in theory,121 Other inconsistencies are based on the economic irregularities that occurred before, during and after the attacks.

As for the authors, some of these theories maintain that some members of the United States government knew about the plans to attack the twin towers but did nothing to prevent them. Others even directly accuse the United States government of planning and executing the attacks.

Among the main opponents of the version given by the US government is the French journalist and director of the left-wing website Red Voltaire Thierry Meyssan , who wrote a book called La gran impostura . In his work, Meyssan exhibits a series of reasons and arguments why, according to him, it is not possible to take the government version for granted.

Another of the staunchest critics is the American professor David Ray Griffin , author of the book Unmasking 9/11 122 where he makes a point-by-point analysis of the events that occurred on September 11, 2001. Griffin claims to have found at least 115 logical flaws serious 123 in the official version of the attacks. 124

film adaptations
Two films based on these attacks were released in 2006 :

United 93 , which is based on hypotheses about the events that occurred aboard United Airlines Flight 93 .
World Trade Center , which is inspired by the events that occurred after the damage caused to the affected area after the collapse of the Twin Towers.