The USS Cole bombing: A
history of tragedy 
Compiled by Flagship Staff Oct 6, 2010 
The USS Cole (DDG 67) is towed away from the port city of Aden, Yemen, into open sea by the Military Sealift Command ocean-going tug USNS Catawba (TATF 168) on Oct. 29, 2000. Cole will be placed aboard the Norwegian heavy transport ship M/V Blue Marlin and transported back to the United States for repair.
The Arleigh Burke class destroyer was the target of a suspected terrorist attack in the port of Aden on Oct.
12, 2000, during a scheduled refueling. The attack killed 17 crew members and injured 39 others.
As the ten year anniversary of the attack on the guided missile destroyer USS Cole (DDG 67) approaches, the Navy prepares to remember the passing of 17 souls in what could be called the prelude to the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks at the World Trade Center Towers in New York City and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. Four years after its commissioning, the USS Cole deployed twice, the Crst February – September 1998 with the John C. Stennis battle Group, then again on Aug. 8, 2000 with the George Washington Battle Group. It was on its second deployment on October 12 when it was hit with an explosion.
Plotting started in Spring 1999. A similar attempt to bomb the USS The Sullivans 10 months prior failed when the overloaded bomb boat sank.
On October 12, 2001, a 35-foot boat laden with the explosives RDX (used in a number of common military explosives) and TNT with two bombers aboard rammed the USS Cole port amidships while it was refueling in Aden harbor, ripping a 40-foot by 60-foot hole in the hull and causing extensive internal damage.
The vessel was moored at a refueling platform when the attack occurred. The two suicide bombers waved to some of the ship’s crew who  were topside, many of whom later said they assumed the approaching craft was a garbage boat. Many of the crew were below decks for lunch.
Al-Nashiri mastermined the attack under the direction of Osama bin Laden. Jamal al Badawi was probably the chief coordinator in Yemen.Fahd al Quso was supposed to Clm the attack,but he overslept and did not arrive in time. During the memorial service for the deceased Sailors held six days after the attack, Richard Danzig the Secretary of the Navy at the time asked the audience, “What will we do collectively in light of how many have done so much for us?” “17 answered that question,” Danzig stated. “They didn’t opt just for themselves, they didn’t stay home, they didn’t turn away from their country. They put themselves out there. They joined a family, the United States Navy, and the USS Coles – a ship, the very essence of a group enterprise. And think not just of these 17. Think of the 39 who were injured and then think of the 240 beyond them – the 240 who absorbed the shock of the explosion, who saw the death of 17, the injury of two score, but who turned to and fought on; fought together for their ship and for their shipmates. “For two days and two nights, they fought under the most extreme conditionss – blood, bent and broken steel, kooding, uncertainty and danger,” Danzig explained. “They saved their ship, their injures – every one of thems – and each other. And then their generators failed. The waters rose and they had to do it all over again. Waistdeep in water, manning bucket brigades by hand, they did it again. Amidst all of that, their captain said to me, “Mr. Secretary, we will save this ship. We will repair this ship. We will take this ship home and we will sail this ship again to sea.”
And one year after the incident the ship’s command master chief told an audience about sacriCce.
“That day we were faced with tremendous odds, a 60-foot hole in the ship, dead and wounded shipmates – but this crew would continue to deny the terrorist the victory they sought that  day,” said HMCM(SW/AW/FMF) James G. Parlier. “We also knew that without a shadow of a doubt that this crew was up to the task of getting the USS Cole home. We never changed course from our objectives. “ After 14 months of upgrades and repairs, the Navy’s “Determined Warrior” USS Cole (DDG 67), returned to the keet and full active duty. Cole, an Arleigh Burke-class AEGIS destroyer, departed Pascagoula, Miss., on April 19 and headed for its homeport in Norfolk.
“Today, we look forward,” said Cmdr. Kevin Sweeney, Cole’s commanding oncer. “We look forward to heading home,  returning to the keet and getting back into the fight.”