Altitude sickness
What is altitude sickness?
Altitude sickness (also known as acute mountain sickness) is the name given to the physiological reactions of the human body (response), which occur as a result of exposure to the low pressure of oxygen that exists at high altitude.

Altitude sickness is the name given to the reactions of the body exposed to low atmospheric pressure at high altitudes.

As we ascend, there is a progressive decrease in atmospheric pressure and also in the partial pressure of oxygen in the air we breathe in. Oxygen is essential for life and its sudden decrease produces important alterations that, if maintained for an excessive time, can even lead to death. For this reason, during the ascent to the peaks, mountaineers have to undergo a period of acclimatization in order for their body to adapt to these low oxygen pressures.

Where does altitude sickness occur?
The first symptoms of mountain sickness can begin to be felt from 2,500-3,000 meters above sea level. Many ski resorts are at this point. In sensitive people, they can appear even at lower heights. From 5,000 meters on, there is no longer any dwelling permanently inhabited by man, since he would eventually die due to the problems that arise at this point. Therefore, the risk of suffering from altitude sickness in areas such as the mountains of Nepal and the Andes, where tourist regions can be at an altitude between 3,000 and 4,000 meters, is completely real. Every year there are at least seven altitude-related deaths among the 50,000 travelers to Nepal.

Favoring factors
The incidence of altitude sickness varies greatly from one individual to another (individual variability). There are people who support rapid ascents better than others. Other influencing factors are the speed of ascent (the faster, the greater the chances of onset), the length of stay at a certain height, continued exercise at high altitudes, and age (the youngest and the elderly present greater predisposition). Altitude sickness does not depend on the physical condition of the person and can affect even the most experienced athletes.

Related Posts
Visit our section ' Sport and exercise ' to see other articles of interest:

Most common sports injuries (general)
Concussion
Limb frostbite
Blindness in the snow
Acclimatization
By lowering the oxygen pressure in the inspired air and, therefore, in the blood, the body sets in motion a series of mechanisms designed to provide a greater amount of oxygen to the cells. They increase respiration and pulse, as well as the pumping efficiency of the heart and the number of red blood cells (the blood cells responsible for oxygen-carrying capacity). However, the reduction in oxygen has a number of unintended consequences: increased pressure in the pulmonary circulation (pulmonary hypertension), changes in blood pH values ​​(acidity), disturbances in fluid / electrolyte balance (salt), as well as the passage of blood or fluid to surrounding tissues (fluid extravasation or edema).

Altitude sickness occurs by rapidly ascending from a certain height to a higher one, and staying at that height without adequate prior acclimatization.

How can altitude sickness be avoided?
Making a gradual ascent. The first and most important thing is to climb relatively slowly, making suitable periods of acclimatization of 2 to 3 days at a certain altitude (starting from 2,000 m) before spending the night at a higher altitude. That is, climbing during the day, sleeping two consecutive nights in the lower camp. The following rates of ascent are advisable: up to 5,000 meters, ascending an average of 340-400 meters maximum, from 5,000 m and up to 6,000 m, ascending 250 meters per day; and above 6,000 m, ascend a maximum of 150-200 m per day.
In case of problems, it is essential to descend to a lower level than the one you were acclimatized to and rest for 24 or 48 hours before resuming the ascent. If the symptoms are severe, start the descent immediately, always accompanied.
Drink plenty of fluids (at least 3 or 4 liters a day).
Avoid drinking alcohol.
Hyperglucidic diet: rich in sugars and starches above all.
Avoid staying cold.
Altitude sickness can be prevented, to some extent, with a medicine called Acetazolamide, at a dose of 250 mg / 12 hours or 500 mg, in a single nightly dose. Some experts suggest that to know the possible side effects of the drug it is better to give it a 2-day trial before the trip. Possible side effects include nausea, taste disturbances, tingling in the hands and feet, frequent and heavy urination, visual disturbances, and a skin rash. Taking this medication does not mean that the advice to climb slowly can be ignored.
Danger signs for altitude sickness
Danger signs generally develop in the first 36 hours. They affect more than 50% of travelers above 3,500 meters and almost 100% of people who quickly climb 5,000 meters without acclimatizing.

A mild headache that goes away with pain relievers (acetaminophen, aspirin, etc.)
Nausea and malaise
Slight dizziness
Sleeping difficulties
If these symptoms appear at altitudes below 3,000 meters, you should stop and rest for a couple of days before continuing to climb. At heights of 3,500 meters, you should try to go down from 300 to 500 meters, and stay there for 2 days before other permanent ascents.

Serious symptoms of altitude sickness
A severe and severe headache that does not go away with regular pain relievers; vomiting
Marked nausea
Dizziness, incoordination, visual disturbances
Chest pressure, rapid breathing and pulse, feeling short of breath
Swelling or edema, usually around the eyes and, in some cases, in the ankles and hands
Decreased amount of urine
Confusion, disorientation
Psychological changes (indifference, loss of sense of danger, etc.)
Seizures
When these symptoms appear, medical help should be sought immediately and the descent to the lowest possible height begins quickly.

Severe forms of altitude sickness
There are two serious forms of altitude sickness. They can be preceded by mild symptoms (headache, insomnia , lack of appetite, mild lightheadedness) or appear abruptly in a previously healthy mountaineer, due to a steep or very rapid ascent. Both have a high mortality rate and can occur after a day or a day and a half has already passed, at too high a height (usually above 3,500 meters). They are as follows:

HAPE - High-altitude pulmonary edema (fluid in the lungs).
HACE - High-rise cerebral edema (fluid in the brain).
High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE)
Symptoms of HAPE are severe, including severe shortness of breath, dry cough , bloody spit, pressure or pain in the chest, palpitations, and fatigue . A bubbling noise may be heard during breathing (pulmonary edema). The lips, outer edges of the ears, and nails may appear bluish (cyanotic), due to lack of oxygen.

High-Rise Brain Edema (HACE)
It is the most serious and fastest form of presentation of altitude sickness. The symptoms of HACE are mainly: nausea, vomiting, headaches , visual disturbances, irritability, incoordination, distraction, confusion, possible loss of consciousness, seizures and even coma.

Treatment
If the symptoms are mild, resting on the same ground for 24 - 48 hours, along with good hydration and a diet rich in sugars, are usually sufficient. The ascent should be prohibited for people suffering from altitude sickness symptoms - even if they are mild - since they can evolve into more serious forms.

If the symptoms are more severe or worsen, the affected person should be lowered to the lowest possible height immediately, and always accompanied. Sometimes a 400-meter descent is usually enough to notice an improvement.

Another measure is to administer oxygen through a mask, an amount of 3 to 5 liters per minute at a concentration not less than 40%. For the treatment of headache, minor analgesics (paracetamol, aspirin, etc.) can be used. As for high altitude insomnia, especially if it is caused by periodic pauses in breathing, it should be treated with acetazolamide, but never with hypnotic drugs or sedatives such as those used for sleep, as they can make breathing even worse.

If a doctor is available, he or she will be able to administer whatever medications he or she thinks are necessary. Medication is not a substitute for descent.

Who should never expose themselves to high altitude?
People with chronic heart / lung disease (eg, angina pectoris , chronic bronchitis , emphysema, and some people with severe asthma ).
People with anemia, including sickle cell anemia (low hemoglobin in the blood).
People with untreated blood clotting disorders and a history of thrombosis (clots).
People who have had HAPE or HACE before.
Who should be careful at great heights?
People with successfully treated heart / lung disease.
Pregnant women
Kids
People with high blood pressure
People with a tendency to apnea during sleep.
People who have had HAPE or HACE before.
Other problems to be considered in the high mountains are sunburn, temporary blindness caused by snow (ophthalmia) or cold and freezing.

Dr. Charlie Easmon, Specialist in Travel Medicine
 Updated: 02-15-2017Reviewed by: Dra. Beatriz Esteban Benavides , specialist in Aerospace Medicine
Dr. Salvador Pertusa Martínez , Family Physician and Medical Director of Netdoctor