Turkey will stop teaching the theory of evolution in schools
A representative of the Turkish Ministry of Education, Alpaslan Durmus, has announced that from 2018 the theory of evolution will no longer be taught in schools in Turkey.

Monkeys and humans share more than 90% of genes. 
Monkeys and humans share more than 90% of genes.

"There are controversial issues, in which students have not yet mastered the scientific context to understand them," said Durmus during a public intervention, now accessible as a video on the Ministry's website. In the panel behind the speaker, in which the main points of his intervention are summarized, the phrase appears at the same time: "The unit of 'Beginning of life and evolution' has been eliminated".

DW RECOMMENDS
Modern biology confirms the theory of evolution
When Darwin unveiled the most important law of Evolution 150 years ago, he knew nothing about genes and genomes. Today, molecular biology is still investigating and expanding its work with great interest. (02.10.2009)

200 years of Darwin and the Origin of Species
Darwin continues to inspire scientists and theologians
The Bible Against Darwin - Church and Evolution
The decision means that evolution will no longer be taught during compulsory education in Turkish schools and will only be given in high school, according to the daily "Hürriyet". Durmus assured that the new content already had the approval of the country's president, the Islamist Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

belief versus science

The decision was already advanced, in the form of a project, last February, when the Turkish deputy prime minister, Numan Kurtulmus, described Charles Darwin's theory as "scientifically outdated and rotten". "No rule says that this theory should be taught," said Kurtulmus, a professor of economics at Istanbul University and a member of the Islamist Justice and Development party (AKP), which has ruled Turkey since 2002.

The change in the curriculum then provoked angry protests from the secular opposition, which called on AKP senior officials to "lose their fear of the monkey". Academics from Turkey's top universities criticized the initiative, recalling that Saudi Arabia, known for its ultra-conservative interpretation of Islam, was the only country in which the theory of evolution had been excluded from school education.

Durmus has now announced that the content of the new school manuals will be presented to the public after Ramadan, which ends next Tuesday. As of the new academic year in September, the new plans will be implemented as a pilot project, to be perfected and finally become universal from the 2018-2019 academic year, Durmus specified. The AKP tried as early as 2006 to introduce "creationist" theories into public education, but then the opposition managed to prevent it.

The then Minister of Education, Hüseyin Çelik, defended the need to teach the theory of "intelligent design", because "it coincides with the monotheistic divine books", while Darwinian theories, he said, reflect an atheist ideology.

JOV (ef, Spiegel)