Hey
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
	Look up hey in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Hey or Hey! may refer to:

Contents
1	Interjection
2	Music
2.1	Albums
2.2	Songs
3	Other uses
4	See also
Interjection
Hey (interjection)
"Hey hey hey!", an exclamation used by the character Fat Albert in the animated TV series Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids
"Hey hey hey!", an exclamation used by the character Rerun in the TV series What's Happening!!
Music
Hey (band), a Polish rock band
Hey Hey Hey (2007 single), a 2007 single by Natasha (singer)
Albums
Hey (Andreas Bourani album), or the title song
Hey! (Julio Iglesias album), or the title song
Hey! (Jullie album), or the title song
Hey! Album, by Marvelous 3
Hey! (The Gruesomes album), by The Gruesomes
Hey (Toni Price album), by Toni Price
Hey: A Pixies Tribute, a Pixies tribute album
Hey (EP), an album by alternative hip hop artist Leif
Songs
"Hey" (Lil Jon song), 2010
"Hey" (Mitchel Musso song), 2009
"Hey!" (Masaharu Fukuyama song), by Masaharu Fukuyama
"Hey", by Bic Runga from Drive
"Hey", by Crystal Bernard, Don't Touch Me There, 1991
"Hey", by Gillmor, opening theme for the U.S. sitcom Unhitched
"Hey", by the Goo Goo Dolls from Hold Me Up
"Hey", by Hanson from Underneath
"Hey!", by The Hellacopters from Payin' the Dues
"Hey", by Leeland from Sound of Melodies
"Hey!", by MF Doom from Operation: Doomsday
"Hey", by Movielife from Forty Hour Train Back to Penn
"Hey!", by Oingo Boingo from Boingo
"Hey", by the Pixies from Doolittle
"Hey", by the Red Hot Chili Peppers from Stadium Arcadium
"Hey", by The Suicide Machines from Destruction by Definition
"Hey (I've Been Feeling Kind of Lonely)", by Danny Saucedo from Heart Beats
"Hey! (So What)", by Dannii Minogue from Neon Nights
Hey Hey
"Hey Hey (Swami song)"
"Hey, Hey", by Dispatch from Silent Steeples
"Hey Hey", by The Planet Smashers from No Self Control
"Hey, Hey, Hey", by Elvis Presley from the soundtrack for the film Clambake
"Hey, Hey, Hey", by Michael Franti and Spearhead from The Sound of Sunshine
"Hey! Hey! Hey!", by The Riverboat Gamblers from Something to Crow About
"Hey-Hey-Hey-Hey!", by Little Richard
"Rock and Roll" (Gary Glitter song), commonly known as "The Hey song"
Hey Ya!, by OutKast
Other uses
Hey (surname)
Hey, Iran, a village in Zanjan Province, Iran
Hey Hey, Iran
Hey, a dance figure in English Country Dancing and Morris dancing
Hanchey Army Heliport (IATA: HEY), a military heliport serving Fort Rucker in Dale County, Alabama, United States
See also
All pages beginning with "Hey"
Hay (disambiguation)
Interjection
Heya (disambiguation)
WP:HEY (Wikipedia editing term)