Darwin's Theory of Evolution

Darwin's Theory of Evolution - Premise
Darwin's theory of evolution is the widely held idea that life is related and has descended from a common ancestor. Birds and bananas, fish and flowers -- they are all related. Darwin's general theory assumes the development of life from non-life and stresses a purely naturalistic (undirected) "descent with modification". That is, complex creatures evolved from simpler ancestors naturally, over time. In short, as random genetic mutations occur within an organism's genetic code, beneficial mutations are preserved, because they aid survival -- a process known as "natural selection." These beneficial mutations are passed on to the next generation. Over time,


Darwin's Theory of Evolution - Natural Selection
Although Darwin's theory of evolution is a relatively young archetype, the evolutionary worldview itself is as old as antiquity. Ancient Greek philosophers such as Anaximander postulated the development of life from non-life and the evolutionary descent of man from animals. Charles Darwin simply brought something new to the old philosophy -- a plausible mechanism called "natural selection." Natural selection acts to preserve and accumulate advantageous minor genetic mutations. Suppose a member of a species developed a functional advantage (it grew wings and learned to fly). Her offspring would inherit that advantage and pass it on to her offspring. Lower (disadvantaged) members of the same species will gradually die, leaving only the superior (favoured) members of the species. Natural selection is the preservation of a functional advantage that allows the species to better compete in its habitat. Natural selection is the naturalistic equivalent of domestic breeding. Over the centuries, human breeders have produced dramatic changes in domestic animal populations by selecting individuals for breeding. Breeders gradually weed out undesirable traits over time. Similarly, natural selection gradually eliminates inferior species over time. Human breeders have produced dramatic changes in domestic animal populations by selecting individuals for breeding. Breeders gradually weed out undesirable traits over time. Similarly, natural selection gradually eliminates inferior species over time. Human breeders have produced dramatic changes in domestic animal populations by selecting individuals for breeding. Breeders gradually weed out undesirable traits over time. Similarly, natural selection gradually eliminates inferior species over time.


Darwin's Theory of Evolution - Slowly But Sure...
Darwin's theory of evolution is a slow gradual process. Darwin wrote: "...Natural selection acts only by taking advantage of small successive variations; it never takes a sudden leap, but must proceed with short, sure, though slow steps. 1 Thus Darwin recognizes that: "If If the existence of any complex organ could be demonstrated, which could not have been formed by numerous small successive modifications, my theory would be completely undone. twoSuch a complex organ would be known as an "irreducibly complex system." An irreducibly complex system is one composed of multiple parts, all of which are necessary for the system to function. If even one part were missing, the entire system would cease to function. Each part is integral. 3Therefore, such a system could not have evolved slowly, piece by piece. A common mousetrap is an ordinary non-biological example of irreducible complexity. It is made up of five basic parts: a hook (to hold the bait), a powerful spring, a thin rod called "the hammer," a safety bar, to hold the hammer in place, and a platform to set the trap. If any of those parts are missing, the mechanism will not work. Each part is integral. The mousetrap is irreducibly complex. 4


Darwin's Theory of Evolution - A Theory in Crisis
Darwin's Theory of Evolution is a theory in crisis in light of the tremendous advances we have made in molecular biology, biochemistry, and genetics in the past fifty years. We now know that there are in fact tens of thousands of irreducibly complex systems at the cellular level. Specified complexity permeates the microscopic biological world. Molecular biologist Michael Denton wrote: "Although the tiniest bacterial cells are incredibly small, weighing less than 10-12grams, each one is, in fact, a veritable micro-miniaturized factory, containing thousands of exquisitely designed pieces of intricate molecular machinery, made up entirely of a hundred billion atoms, far more complicated than any man-made mechanism and absolutely parallel in the inanimate world." 5

And we don't need a microscope to look at irreducible complexity. The eye, the ear, and the heart are examples of irreducible complexity, although they were not recognized as such in Darwin's day. Nonetheless, Darwin confessed: "To suppose that the eye, with all its inimitable tricks for adjusting focus for different distances, for allowing different amounts of light, and for the correction of spherical and chromatic aberration, could have been formed by natural selection, seems, I freely confess, absurd in the highest possible degree .

Explore More Now!
Footnotes:
1 Charles Darwin: "On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life, 1859, p.162.
2 Ibid. p. 158.
3 Michael Behe , "Darwin's Black Box," 1996.
4 "Unlocking the Mystery of Life," Illustra Media documentary, 2002.
5 Michael Denton, "Evolution: A Theory in Crisis," 1986. 250.
6 Charles Darwin: "On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life, 1859, p.155.