
Welcome!

Here you will find a variety of materials on the theory of biological evolution. So far, we can offer you four sections.
1. "Site Library". The most important section and the largest section. It does not need a separate and detailed introduction, it is better to see for yourself.
2. "History of the development of life." This is the sum of the knowledge of modern science about the development of life on Earth: from the appearance of the planet to the appearance of man. The material is richly illustrated. Keep in mind that many pages, when opened with images, are around 180 kb. Another advantage of this section is the semantic accessibility of the material.
3. "Creationism". Creationism is the doctrine of the creation of the world by God, characteristic of religions. Radical Christianity in the United States, in connection with its success, has given rise to a pseudoscientific theory of creationism, supposedly based on modern scientific data. Although science is not worth a penny there. Anyone with even the slightest knowledge of natural science can be convinced of this. Now the Russian Internet is littered with creationist publications. This section contains only the best professional scientific articles on the topic of creationism.
4. Links. Who cares what else you can find close to the theme of evolution on the Internet.
5. "Guest". It's obvious.
For the convenience of visitors, we have classified the materials according to the level of complexity. Accordingly: 1- the first level is the easiest, accessible to everyone. 2 - The second level is already more difficult, you need to be careful, carefully analyze the material, which is sometimes presented dryly. 3 - The third level of complexity - the material is strictly scientific, fully accessible to specialists or a very trained visitor. This classification has been created for your convenience. If you feel you don't need it, ignore it.

I would like to thank Gregory A. Yaklyushin and George Ryurikov (2:5020/5480.11), a graduate of the Department of Theory of Evolution at the Faculty of Biology, Moscow State University, who assisted me in creating the site.