EVOLUTION
WAYS AND MECHANISMS

  

Suggestions of conscience in connection with repentance and a sense of duty are the most important difference between man and animal.
Charles Darwin            
Charles Darwin and his theory of evolution



Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882) is the founder of evolutionary biology. Charles Darwin is also the author of a number of major works on botany, zoology, geology and comparative psychology.

Life and works of Ch. Darwin. Charles Darwin was born on February 12, 1809 in the family of a doctor. While studying at the Universities of Edinburgh and Cambridge, Darwin gained a thorough knowledge of zoology, botany and geology, skills and a taste for field research. An important role in shaping his scientific outlook was played by the book of the outstanding English geologist Charles Lyell "Principles of Geology". Lyell argued that the modern appearance of the Earth was gradually formed under the influence of the same natural forces that are active at the present time. Darwin was familiar with the evolutionary ideas of Erasmus Darwin, Lamarck and other early evolutionists, but they did not seem convincing to him.

 The decisive turn in his life was the round-the-world voyage on the Beagle ship (1832-1837). According to Darwin himself, during this trip he was most impressed by: “1) the discovery of giant fossil animals that were covered with a shell similar to that of modern armadillos; 2) the fact that, as one moves along the mainland of South America, closely related species of animals replace one another; 3) the fact that closely related species of various islands of the Galapagos archipelago differ slightly from each other. It was obvious that such facts, as well as many others, could only be explained on the basis of the assumption that the species gradually changed, and this problem began to haunt me.

Business management training will help not only a beginner, but even an experienced, hardened leader to learn how to manage his subordinates most effectively. It is not enough just to give instructions, you need to be able to set a task for employees, clearly formulate it, correctly distribute human and other resources. It will not be superfluous for the authorities to develop the skills of correct and fruitful motivation of others through a system of rewards and punishments, as well as through communications between the boss and subordinates.

Do not forget that management often faces many other issues. What to do in the event of a local riot in the workplace, what actions to take if there is a need for mass dismissal of workers, and, at the same time, avoid conflict situations or get out of them on the most favorable terms.

Upon returning from his voyage, Darwin begins to ponder the problem of the origin of species. He considers various ideas, including the idea of ​​Lamarck, and rejects them, since none of them gives an explanation for the facts of the amazing adaptability of animals and plants to their living conditions. What seemed to the early evolutionists as a given and self-explanatory, appears to Darwin as the most important question. He collects data on the variability of animals and plants in nature and under conditions of domestication. Many years later, recalling how his theory arose, Darwin would write: “I soon realized that selection was the cornerstone of man's success in creating useful animal and plant races. However, for some time it remained a mystery to me how selection could be applied to organisms living in natural conditions. Just at that time in England, the ideas of the English scientist T. Malthus about the increase in the number of populations exponentially were vigorously discussed. “In October, 1838, I read Malthus’ book On Population,” continues Darwin, “and since, through long observation of the way of life of animals and plants, I was well prepared to appreciate the significance of the struggle for existence going on everywhere, I was immediately struck by the idea that under such conditions favorable changes should tend to be preserved, and unfavorable ones to be destroyed. The result of this should be the formation of new species. having been well prepared to appreciate the significance of the struggle for existence going on everywhere, I was immediately struck by the thought that under such conditions favorable changes should tend to be preserved, and unfavorable ones to be destroyed. The result of this should be the formation of new species. having been well prepared to appreciate the significance of the struggle for existence going on everywhere, I was immediately struck by the thought that under such conditions favorable changes should tend to be preserved, and unfavorable ones to be destroyed. The result of this should be the formation of new species.



Alfred Russel Wallace (1823 - 1913) created the theory of natural selection simultaneously with Charles Darwin. One of the founders of zoogeography.

So, the idea of ​​the origin of species through natural selection came to Darwin in 1838. For 20 years he worked on it. In 1856, on the advice of Lyell, he began to prepare his work for publication. In 1858, the young English scientist Alfred Wallace sent Darwin the manuscript of his paper "On the tendency of varieties to deviate indefinitely from the original type." This article contained an exposition of the idea of ​​the origin of species through natural selection. Darwin was ready to refuse to publish his work, but his friends, the geologist Ch. Lyell and the botanist G. Hooker, who had long known about Darwin's idea and got acquainted with the preliminary drafts of his book, convinced the scientist that both works should be published simultaneously.

Darwin's book, The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favorable Races in the Struggle for Life, was published in 1859, and its success exceeded all expectations. His idea of ​​evolution met with passionate support from some scientists and harsh criticism from others. This and subsequent works of Darwin "Changes in animals and plants during domestication", "The origin of man and sexual selection", "The expression of emotions in man and animals" were translated into many languages ​​immediately after the publication. It is noteworthy that the Russian translation of Darwin's book "Changes in Animals and Plants under Domestication" was published earlier than its original text. The outstanding Russian paleontologist V. O. Kovalevsky translated this book from the publishing proofs provided to him by Darwin and published it in separate editions.

 

 

 

Basic principles of the evolutionary theory of Ch. Darwin. The essence of the Darwinian concept of evolution is reduced to a number of logical, experimentally verified and confirmed by a huge amount of factual data provisions:

1.                               Within each species of living organisms, there is a huge range of individual hereditary variability in morphological, physiological, behavioral and any other characteristics. This variability may be continuous, quantitative, or discontinuous qualitative, but it always exists.

2.                               All living organisms reproduce exponentially.

3.                               Life resources for any kind of living organisms are limited, and therefore there must be a struggle for existence either between individuals of the same species, or between individuals of different species, or with natural conditions. In the concept of "struggle for existence" Darwin included not only the actual struggle of an individual for life, but also the struggle for success in reproduction.

4.                               In the conditions of the struggle for existence, the most adapted individuals survive and give offspring, having those deviations that accidentally turned out to be adaptive to given environmental conditions. This is a fundamentally important point in Darwin's argument. Deviations do not occur in a directed way - in response to the action of the environment, but by chance. Few of them are useful in specific conditions. The descendants of a surviving individual who inherit a beneficial variation that allowed their ancestor to survive are better adapted to the environment than other members of the population.

5.                               Survival and preferential reproduction of adapted individuals Darwin called natural selection .

6.                               The natural selection of individual isolated varieties under different conditions of existence gradually leads to divergence (divergence) of the characteristics of these varieties and, ultimately, to speciation.

On these postulates, flawless from the point of view of logic and backed up by a huge amount of facts, the modern theory of evolution was created.

The main merit of Darwin is that he established the mechanism of evolution, which explains both the diversity of living beings and their amazing expediency, adaptability to the conditions of existence. This mechanism is a gradual natural selection of random undirected hereditary changes .

Formation of the synthetic theory of evolution. The problem of the inheritance of change was key to the fate of Darwin's theory. In Darwin's time, ideas of merged heredity dominated. Heredity was explained by the fusion of the "bloods" of ancestral forms. The "bloods" of the parents mix, giving offspring with intermediate characteristics. It was from this position that the mathematician F. Jenkin opposed Darwin's theory. He believed that the accumulation of favorable deviations is impossible, since when crossing they dissolve, dilute, become negligibly small and, finally, disappear altogether. Darwin, who found answers to most of the objections to his theory put forward by his contemporaries, was baffled by this objection.

The way out of this impasse was provided by the theory of corpuscular, discrete heredity, created by Gregor Mendel (1822-1884). Heredity is discrete. Each parent passes on the same number of genes to their offspring. Genes can suppress or modify the manifestations of other genes, but are not able to change the information recorded in them. In other words, genes do not change when merged with other genes and are passed on to the next generation in the same form in which they were received from the previous one. In the case of incomplete dominance, we actually observe in the offspring of the first generation an intermediate manifestation of the characteristics of the parents. But in the second and subsequent generations, parental characteristics may reappear unchanged (remember § VI - 3).

In the 1920s, a synthesis of Darwinism and genetics was carried out. The outstanding Russian geneticist S.S. C h e t v e r i k o v. Based on his work on the analysis of natural populations, he came to understand the mechanisms of accumulation and maintenance of individual variability. Simultaneously with S. S. Chetverikov, R. Fisher, J. Holdaney and S. Wright came to the synthesis of the ideas of corpuscular genetics with classical Darwinism. A major contribution to the formation of the modern synthetic theory of evolution was made by zoologist E. Myr and paleontologist J. Simpson. The theory of natural selection was developed in the works of the outstanding Russian scientist I. I. Shmalgauzen. The foundations of ecology, biogeography, phylogenetic systematics and ethology (the science of animal behavior), laid down in the works of Darwin, developed into independent sciences and, in turn, made a major contribution to the formation of modern ideas about the ways, mechanisms and patterns of evolution. The most important advances in evolutionary biology in recent years have been achieved due to the active application in evolutionary research of the ideas and methods of molecular genetics and developmental biology.

1. What observations led Darwin to think about the variability of species?                

2. How Darwin came up with the idea of ​​natural selection.                 

3. What is the essence of Darwin's theory?                

4. What is the significance of Mendel's laws for understanding the mechanisms of evolution?                

 