How to explain the theory of evolution in a simple way
Image of Rodolfo Ochoa PUBLISHED BY:
RODOLFO OCHOA
How to explain evolution in a simple way 
©Thinkstock / Hemera
Today, it is clear that the theory of evolution is a fundamental pillar in the study of biology and science in general. However, there is still much confusion regarding how it works.

A study conducted at Harvard University by scientist Andrew Shtulman found that most university students had trouble understanding how the theory of evolution works , falling into common misconceptions most of the time. 

125176421 0
Dorling Kindersley RF/Thinkstock
The study found that many made the mistake of believing that parents adapted to the environment and then passed on their newly acquired skills to their offspring. This is a fairly common misconception, which also explains why some people disparage evolution by arguing that if we came from apes, how can apes still exist?

The gene pool, key to explaining evolution
To understand evolution , we first have to understand that evolution is, plain and simple, about changes in the gene pool over time. And what is the gene pool? It is the total set of genes in a given population, let's explain it with a simple analogy.

96679161 0
iStockphoto/Thinkstock
Imagine that in a single population there are 100 people, and of these 50 have blue eyes. This means that 50 have the genes for blue eyes and 50 do not. The genes of all of them would be your gene pool.

Every time they reproduce, the gene pool remains the same, and even if the population grows, 50% of the inhabitants should have blue eyes.

In the previous example, if for some reason the frequency changes, then we can already speak of evolution. It's that easy.

What causes evolution?
There are four factors that can cause changes in the gene pool and thus cause evolution. These are population reduction, the way they reproduce, gene mutation, and gene flow. 

We can explain all of the above even more simply with the following video, which organizes everything in a scheme called "the five fingers of evolution".


Natural selection, the final complement.
Once we understand the above, we can now give a better context to natural selection, the process by which species have diversified from a common ancestor.

643px Explanation of Evolution v2.1
Beyond silence/Wikimedia
Once we understand these five processes, we can quickly and easily explain evolution to whomever we want using the five-finger method. 

As a curiosity, here at Ojo Ciencia we publish some mysteries of our own evolution that we have not yet been able to solve.