The Origin of Species
This is a highlighted article.  Click here for more information.Source: Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
On the Origin of Species
The Origin of Species
Origin of Species title page.jpg
English edition of the book On the Origin of Species (1859)
Author(s)	Charles Darwin
Language	English
Parents	United Kingdom
Subject matter	Natural selection
Evolutionary biology
Gender	science , biology
Launch	November 24 , 1859
Pages	502
Chronology

On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection
Fertilization of Orchids	

The Origin of Species (or, more fully, The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life ) [ 1 ] is a work of scientific literature written by Charles Darwin , which is considered the basis of evolutionary biology . [ 2 ] Published on November 24, 1859, it introduced the scientific theory that life forms evolve over generations through a process of natural selection . The book presented evidence that the diversification of life forms results from acommon ancestry , which evolved through a branching pattern . Darwin included evidence he had collected on the Beagle expedition in the 1830s and also his subsequent discoveries through research, comparison and experimentation. [ 3 ]

Several evolutionary ideas had already been proposed to explain new discoveries in biology . There was growing support for such ideas among dissenting anatomists and the general public, but during the first half of the 19th century the English scientific elite was closely linked to the Church of England and scientific activity was considered part of natural theology . Ideas about the transmutation of speciesthey were controversial, as they conflicted with beliefs that species were immutable parts of a designed hierarchy and that humans were unique, unrelated to other animals. Its political and theological implications were intensely debated, but transmutation was not accepted by the scientific mainstream of the time.

The book was written for non-specialist readers and attracted wide interest after its publication. As Darwin was an eminent scientist, his findings were taken seriously and the evidence he presented generated scientific, philosophical and religious discussions. The debate over the book contributed to the campaign by TH Huxley and his fellow X Club members to secularize science through the promotion of scientific naturalism . Within two decades, there was broad scientific consensus that evolution with a branching pattern of descent occurred, but scientists were slow to give natural selection the meaning that Darwin saw fit. During " The Eclipse of Darwinism", from the 1880s to the 1930s, several other mechanisms of evolution received more credit. With the development of the modern evolutionary synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s, Darwin's concept of evolutionary adaptation through natural selection became central to the theory modern evolutionary theory and would become the unifying concept of the life sciences .


Index
1	Darwin's Theory Summary
two	background
2.1	Developments prior to Darwin's theory
2.2	The beginning of Darwin's theory
2.3	further development
3	Publication
3.1	Time spent to publish
3.2	Events Leading to Publication: "Big Book" Manuscript
3.3	Joint publication of articles by Wallace and Darwin
3.4	Book summary
3.5	Murray as editor; title choice
3.6	Publication and subsequent editions
3.7	Publishing outside the UK
4	Contents
4.1	Title and intro pages
4.2	Variation under domestication and under nature
4.3	Struggle for existence, natural selection and divergence
4.4	Variation and heredity
4.5	Difficulties for the theory
4.6	geological record
4.7	Geographic distribution
4.8	Classification, morphology, embryology, rudimentary organs
4.9	Final considerations
5	Structure, style and themes
5.1	Nature and Structure of Darwin's Argument
5.2	Human evolution
6	Reception
6.1	Impact on the scientific community
6.1.1	Impact outside Great Britain
6.1.2	Challenges for natural selection
6.2	Impact on economic and political debates
6.3	religious attitudes
7	modern influence
8	See also
9	Grades
10	References
11	Bibliography
11.1	Works cited
11.2	additional reading
11.2.1	contemporary reviews
12	external links
Darwin's Theory Summary

Darwin pictured shortly before publication
Darwin's theory of evolution is based on important facts and the inferences drawn from them, which biologist Ernst Mayr summarized as follows: [ 4 ]

Each species is fertile enough that, if all offspring survive to reproduce, the population will grow (fact);
Despite periodic fluctuations, populations remain approximately the same size (fact);
Resources such as food are limited and relatively stable over time (fact);
A struggle for survival follows (inference);
Individuals in a population vary significantly from one another (fact);
Much of this variation is hereditary (fact);
Individuals less suited to the environment are less likely to survive and reproduce; individuals better suited to the environment are more likely to survive and more likely to reproduce and leave their heritable traits to future generations, which produces the process of natural selection (fact);
This process, which occurs slowly, results in populations that change to adapt to their environments and, ultimately, these variations accumulate over time to form new species (inference).
background
Developments prior to Darwin's theory
In later editions of the book, Darwin traced evolutionary ideas back to Aristotle ; [ 5 ] the text he cites is Aristotle 's summary of the ideas of the Greek philosopher Empedocles . [ 6 ] Early Christian Church Fathers and medieval European scholars interpreted the Genesis creation narrative allegorically rather than as a literal historical account; [ 7 ]organisms were described by their mythological and heraldic significance, as well as by their physical form. Nature was widely considered unstable and capricious, and it was believed in the spontaneous generation of life and that the union between species resulted in the birth of monsters. [ 8 ]


Cuvier's 1799 paper on living and fossil elephants helped establish the reality of extinction .
The Protestant Reformation inspired a literal interpretation of the Bible , with concepts of creation that conflicted with the findings of an emerging science that sought explanations congruent with the mechanism of René Descartes and the empiricism of the Baconian method . After the turmoil of the English Civil War , the Royal Society wanted to show that science did not threaten religious and political stability. John Ray developed a natural theology of rational order that proved influential; in its taxonomy , the speciesthey were static and fixed, their adaptation and complexity designed by God, and the varieties showed slight differences caused by local conditions. In God's benevolent design, carnivores caused a mercifully quick death, but the suffering caused by parasitism was a puzzling problem . The biological classification introduced by Carl Linnaeus in 1735 also saw species as fixed according to a "divine plan". In 1766, Georges Buffon suggested that some similar species, such as horses and donkeys, or lions, tigers and leopards, could be varieties descended from a common ancestor. James Ussher 's Chronology, from the 1650s, had calculated creation in 4004 BC, but in the 1780s, geologists observed that the world was much older. Wernerians thought the strata were deposits of declining seas , but James Hutton proposed a self-maintaining infinite cycle, anticipating uniformitarianism . [ 9 ]

Charles Darwin's grandfather Erasmus Darwin outlined a transmutation of species hypothesis in the 1790s, and Jean-Baptiste Lamarck published a more developed theory in 1809. Both imagined that spontaneous generation produced simple life forms that progressively developed. greater complexity, adapting to the environment by inheriting changes in adults caused by use or disuse. This process was later called Lamarckism . Lamarck thought that there was an inherent progressive tendency leading organisms continually toward greater complexity, in parallel but separate lineages, without extinction. [ 10 ] Geoffroy stated that theEmbryonic development recapitulated the transformations of organisms in past ages, when the environment acted on embryos, and that the structures of animals were determined by a constant plan, as demonstrated by homologies . Georges Cuvier vehemently contested such ideas, maintaining that unrelated fixed species showed similarities that reflected a design for functional needs. [ 11 ] His paleontological work in the 1790s had established the reality of extinction, which he explained by local catastrophes followed by the repopulation of areas affected by other species. [ 12]

In the UK, William Paley 's Natural Theology saw adaptation as evidence of a beneficial " design " by the Creator acting through natural laws. All naturalists at the two English universities ( Oxford and Cambridge ) were clergy of the Church of England , and science became a quest for these laws. [ 13 ] Geologists have adapted catastrophism to show repeated worldwide annihilation and the creation of new fixed species adapted to an altered environment, initially identifying the most recent catastrophe as the biblical flood . [ 14] Some anatomists, such asRobert Grant,were influenced by Lamarck and Geoffroy, but most naturalists considered their ideas of transmutation a threat to the divinely appointed social order. [ 15 ]

The beginning of Darwin's theory
Darwin went to the University of Edinburgh in 1825 to study medicine. In his sophomore year, he dropped out of his studies of natural history medicine and spent four months assisting with Robert Grant 's research on marine invertebrates . Grant revealed his enthusiasm for the transmutation of species, but Darwin rejected him. [ 16 ] Beginning in 1827 at Cambridge University , Darwin learned sciences, such as natural theology , from the botanist John Stevens Henslow , and he read works by Paley , John Herschel , and Alexander von Humboldt .. Filled with a zeal for science, he studied catastrophic geology with Adam Sedgwick . [ 17 ] [ 18 ]


In mid-July 1837 Darwin started his "B" notebook on Transmutation of Species , and on page 36 he wrote "I think" above his first evolutionary tree .
In December 1831, he joined the Beagle expedition as a gentleman naturalist and geologist. He read the Principles of Geology of Charles Lyell and since the first stop on land, in Santiago , found in uniformitarianism of Lyell a key to the geological history of the landscape. Darwin discovered fossils resembling huge armadillos and noted the geographic distribution of modern species in hopes of finding their "creation center". [ 19 ] The three Fuegian missionaries that the expedition returned to Tierra del Fuegothey were friendly and civilized, but to Darwin his relatives on the island seemed "wretched and degraded savages", [ 20 ] with which he no longer saw an impassable gap between humans and animals. [ 21 ] When the Beagle approached England in 1836, he noted that the species might not be fixed. [ 22 ] [ 23 ]

Richard Owen showed that the fossils of extinct species that Darwin found in South America were allies of species living on the same continent. In March 1837, ornithologist John Gould announced that the Darwin's nandu was a separate species from the previously described rhea (although their territories overlapped), that mocking birds collected in the Galapagos Islands represented three distinct species, each endemic to a particular island, and that several distinct birds from those islands were all classified as finches . [ 24 ]Darwin began to speculate, in a series of notebooks, on the possibility of "one species mutating into another" to explain these findings, and around July he sketched a genealogical branch of a single evolutionary tree, ruling out Lamarck's independent lineages . who progressed to higher forms. [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Unconventionally, Darwin asked animal breeders as well as established scientists. At the zoo, he saw a monkey for the first time and was deeply impressed by the human appearance of the orangutan . [ 28]

In late September 1838, he began reading An Essay on the Principle of Population by Thomas Malthus , with its statistical argument that human populations, if not constrained, reproduce beyond their means and struggle to survive. Darwin related this to the struggle for existence between wildlife and botanist Augustin Pyrame de Candolle 's "war of species" on plants; he immediately envisioned "a force like a hundred thousand wedges" pushing well-adapted variations into "gaps in the economy of nature", so that the survivors would pass on their shape and abilities and the unfavorable variations would be destroyed.[ 31 ] In December 1838, he noted a similarity between the creators' act of selecting traits and a Malthusian nature, which selects among variants released by "chance", so that "every part of the newly acquired structure is entirely practical." and perfected". [ 32 ]

Darwin now had the basic structure of his theory of natural selection, but he was fully occupied with his geological career and avoided compiling it until his book The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs was completed. [ 33 ] [ 34 ] As he recalled in his autobiography, he "finally got a theory to work with", but it was not until June 1842 that he allowed himself "the satisfaction of writing a very brief summary of my theory in pencil". [ 35 ]

further development
Darwin continued to extensively research and revise his theory while focusing on his main work of publishing the scientific results of the voyage of the Beagle . [ 33 ] He tentatively wrote about his ideas to Lyell in January 1842; [ 36 ] so in June he made a 35-page "pencil sketch" of his theory. [ 37 ] Darwin began correspondence on his theorizing with the botanist Joseph Dalton Hooker in January 1844, and in July completed his "draft" as a 230-page "essay", to be expanded with the results of his research and published. if he died prematurely. [38 ]


Darwin researched how the skulls of different breeds of pigeons varied, as shown in his 1868 Variation of Plants and Animals Under Domestication .
In November 1844, the anonymously published popular science book Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation , written by Scottish journalist Robert Chambers , broadened public interest in the concept of species transmutation. The work used evidence from the fossil record and embryology to support the claim that living things progressed from simple to more complex over time. But it proposed a linear progression rather than the theory of common descent branched behind Darwin's work in progress, and ignored adaptation . Darwin read it shortly after publication and despised its amateur geology and zoology, [ 39 ]but he carefully revised his own arguments after leading scientists, including Adam Sedgwick, attacked his morality and scientific errors. [ 40 ] The book had a significant influence on public opinion and the intense debate helped pave the way for the more scientifically sophisticated acceptance of Origin , moving evolutionary speculation into the mainstream. Although few naturalists were willing to consider transmutation, Herbert Spencer became an active advocate of Lamarckism and progressive development in the 1850s. [ 41 ]

Hooker was persuaded to take out a copy of the "essay" in January 1847, and eventually sent a page of notes giving Darwin much-needed feedback. Mindful of his lack of knowledge of taxonomy , Darwin began an eight-year study of cirripedes , becoming the leading expert on their classification. Using his theory, he discovered homologies showing that slightly altered body parts served different functions to meet new conditions, and he found an intermediate stage in the evolution of distinct sexes . [ 42 ] [ 43 ]

Darwin's studies of cirripeds convinced him that variation arose constantly and not just in response to changing circumstances. In 1854, he completed the last part of his Beagle -related writings and began working full-time on evolution. He now realized that the branching pattern of evolutionary divergence was explained by natural selection constantly working to improve adaptation. His thinking shifted the view that species formed only in isolated populations , such as on islands, to an emphasis on speciation without isolation ; that is, he saw increasing specialization in large stable populations as a continual exploration of new ecological niches.. He conducted empirical research focusing on difficulties with his theory. He has studied developmental and anatomical distinctions between different breeds of many domestic animals, has been actively involved in domestic pigeon farming, and has experimented (with the help of his son Francis ) of ways in which plant and animal seeds can disperse across the world. oceans to colonize distant islands. By 1856, his theory was much more sophisticated, with a mass of supporting evidence. [ 42 ] [ 44 ]

Publication
Time spent to publish
In his autobiography, Darwin said that he "gained much by delaying publication from about 1839, when the theory was clearly conceived, until 1859; and I lost nothing by it." [ 45 ] On the first page of his 1859 book, he noted that, having begun work on the subject in 1837, he had made "some short notes" after five years, enlarged them into an outline in 1844, and "from that period to this day, I have constantly pursued the same goal". [ 46 ] [ 47 ]

Several biographers have proposed that Darwin avoided or delayed publicizing his ideas for personal reasons. Suggested reasons include fear of religious persecution or social disgrace if their views were to be revealed, and concern about upsetting their naturalistic clergy friends or their wife, Emma. Charles Darwin's illness caused repeated delays. His article on Glen Roy turned out to be embarrassingly wrong, and he may have wanted to make sure he was right. David Quammen has suggested that all these factors may have contributed and notes Darwin's large book production and busy family life at that time. [ 48 ]

A more recent study by science historian John van Wyhe has determined that the idea that Darwin delayed publication dates only to the 1940s, with Darwin's contemporaries thinking that the time it took him to produce the work was reasonable. Darwin always finished one book before starting another. While researching, he told many people about his interest in transmutation without causing outrage. He had the firm intention of publishing his studies, but it was not until September 1854 that he was able to work full time. His 1846 estimate that writing his "great book" would take five years proved optimistic. [ 46 ]

Events Leading to Publication: "Big Book" Manuscript

A photograph of Alfred Russel Wallace (1823-1913) taken in Singapore in 1862
An 1855 paper on the "introduction" of species, written by Alfred Russel Wallace , claimed that patterns in the geographic distribution of living and fossil species could be explained if each new species always came into existence close to an already existing and closely related species. . [ 49 ] Charles Lyellacknowledged the implications of Wallace's paper and its possible connection to Darwin's work, although Darwin himself made no such connection, and in a letter written May 1–2, 1856, Lyell asked Darwin to publish his theory to establish the priority. Darwin was torn between the desire to present a complete and convincing account and the pressure to quickly produce a small paper. He met Lyell and, in correspondence with Joseph Dalton Hooker , stated that he did not want to expose his ideas for review by an editor, as would be required for publication in an academic journal. He began an "outline" of the account on May 14, 1856, and in July decided to produce a full technical treatise on the species as his "great book" on Natural Selection .. His theory, including the divergence principle, was completed on September 5, 1857, when he sent Asa Gray a brief but detailed summary of his ideas. [ 50 ] [ 51 ]

Joint publication of articles by Wallace and Darwin
Darwin was hard at work on the manuscript of his "great book" on Natural Selection , when on June 18, 1858 he received a package from Wallace, who stayed in the Moluccas ( Ternate and Gilolo). It included twenty pages describing an evolutionary mechanism, a response to Darwin's recent encouragement, with a request to send it to Lyell if Darwin thought it would be worthwhile. The mechanism was similar to Darwin's own theory, [ 50 ]who wrote to Lyell that "his words came true with a vengeance, ... anticipated" and he "of course would immediately write and offer to send it to whatever newspaper" Wallace chose, adding that "all my originality , whatever it may be, will be crushed". [ 52 ] Lyell and Hooker agreed that a joint publication bringing together Wallace's pages with excerpts from Darwin's 1844 Essay and his 1857 letter to Gray should be presented to the Linnean Society and on July 1, 1858, the articles entitled On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection, by Wallace and Darwin, respectively, were read but generated little reaction. Although Darwin considered Wallace's idea to be identical to his concept of natural selection, historians have noted differences. Darwin described natural selection as being analogous to the artificial selection practiced by animal breeders and emphasized competition between individuals; Wallace made no comparison with selective breeding and focused on the ecological pressures that kept different varieties adapted to local conditions. [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Some historians have suggested that Wallace was actually discussing group selection., rather than a selection that acts on individual variations. [ 56 ]

Book summary
Shortly after the meeting, Darwin decided to write "a summary of all my work" in the form of one or more articles to be published by the Linnean Society , but he was concerned about "how can this be made scientific for a journal, without giving the facts , which would be impossible." He asked Hooker how many pages would be available, but "if the referees rejected it as not being strictly scientific, I would perhaps publish it as a pamphlet." [ 57 ] [ 58 ] He began his "species summary book" on July 20, 1858, while on vacation in Sandown, [ 59 ] and wrote parts of it from memory,[ 60 ]

In early October he began "to wait for my summary to come into a small volume, which will have to be published separately." [ 61 ] In the same period, he continued to collect information and write large, fully detailed sections of the manuscript for his "big book" on Species, Natural Selection . [ 57 ]

Murray as editor; title choice
By mid-March 1859 Darwin's abstract had reached the stage where he was thinking of early publication; Lyell suggested editor John Murray and met with him to see if he would be willing to publish. On March 28, Darwin wrote to Lyell asking about progress, and offered to give Murray assurances "that my book is no longer unorthodox, which the matter makes unavoidable." He attached a draft of the title page proposing An abstract of an Essay on the Origin of Species and Varieties Through natural selection , with the year shown as " 1859 ". [ 62 ] [ 63 ]

Murray's response was favorable, and a very pleased Darwin told Lyell on March 30 that he would "soon be sending out a large MS package, but unfortunately I cannot for a week as the first three chapters are in hand." of three copyists". He gave in to Murray's objection to putting "abstract" in the title, although he felt this justified the lack of references, but wanted to keep the term "natural selection" which was "constantly used in all works on reproduction" and hoped to "keep it it with explanation, something like this ", —Through Natural Selection or the preservation of favored races . [ 63 ] [ 64 ]On 31 March Darwin wrote Murray in confirmation and listed the titles of the 12 chapters in progress: he had written all but "XII. Recap and Conclusion". [ 65 ] Murray immediately responded with a deal to publish the book on the same terms as Lyell published, without even seeing the manuscript: he offered Darwin ⅔ of the profits. [ 66 ] Darwin readily accepted, insisting that Murray would be free to withdraw the offer if, after reading the manuscripts of the chapter, he felt that the work would not sell well .(Murray eventually paid Darwin £180 sterling for the first edition, and by the time of Darwin's death in 1882 the book was in its sixth edition, earning Darwin nearly £3,000 [ 68 ] ).

On April 5, Darwin sent Murray the first three chapters and a proposal for the book's title. [ 69 ] A draft of the title page suggests On the Mutability of Species . [ 70 ] Murray cautiously asked Whitwell Elwin to review the chapters. [ 57 ] At Lyell's suggestion, Elwin recommended that rather than "presenting the theory without evidence", the book should focus on observations on pigeons , briefly stating how these general principles of Darwin illustrated and prepared the way for the larger work. expected soon: "everyone is interested in pigeons." [71 ] Darwin replied that this was impractical: he had only the last chapter left to write. [ 72 ] As of September, the main title still included " An essay on the origin of species and varieties ", but Darwin now proposed dropping the word "varieties". [ 73 ]

With Murray's persuasion, the title was eventually accepted as On the Origin of Species , with the title page added by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life . [ 1 ] In this extended title (and elsewhere in the book) Darwin used the biological term " races " interchangeably with " varieties " , meaning varieties within a species . [ 74 ] [ 75 ] He used the term widely [ 76 ]and, as well as discussions of "the various races, for example, of cabbage" and "the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic animals and plants", [ 77 ] there are three instances in the book where the phrase "races of man" is used, referring to the races of humans. [ 78 ]

Publication and subsequent editions
On the Origin of Species was first published on Thursday, November 24, 1859, priced at fifteen shillings, with a first printing of 1250 copies. [ 79 ] The book was offered to booksellers at Murray's fall sale on Tuesday, November 22, and all available copies were purchased immediately. In total, 1,250 copies were printed, but after deducting the presentation and review copies, and five of them for the Stationers' Hall copyright, about 1,170 copies were available for sale. [ 80 ]Significantly, 500 copies were taken through Charles Edward Mudie's library, ensuring that the book promptly reached a large number of local patrons. [ 81 ] The second edition of 3,000 copies was quickly released on January 7, 1860 [ 82 ] and incorporated several corrections, as well as a response to religious objections by the addition of a new epigraph on page ii, a quote from Charles Kingsley and the phrase "by the Creator" added to the final phrase. [ 83 ]During Darwin's lifetime, the book went through six editions, with cumulative changes and revisions to deal with the counter-arguments raised. The third edition came out in 1861, with a series of sentences rewritten or added and an introductory appendix, An Historical Sketch of the Recent Progress of Opinion on the Origin of Species , [ 84 ] while the fourth, from 1866, had further revisions. The fifth edition, published February 10, 1869, incorporated further changes and for the first time included the phrase " survival of the fittest ", which had been coined by philosopher Herbert Spencer in his Principles of Biology (1864). [ 85 ]

In January 1871, George Jackson Mivart 's On the Genesis of Species listed detailed arguments against natural selection and claimed that it included false metaphysics . [ 86 ] Darwin made extensive revisions to the sixth edition of Origin (this was the first edition in which he used the word " evolution ", which was often associated with embryological development, although all editions concluded with the word "evolved" [ 87 ] [ 88 ] ), and added a new chapter VII, Miscellaneous objections , to address Mivart's arguments. [80 ] [ 89 ]

The sixth edition was published by Murray on 19 February 1872 as The Origin of Species , with "On" dropped from the title. Darwin had told Murray about workers in Lancashire who flocked to buy the fifth edition for 15 shillings and wanted it to become more widely available; the price was then halved to 7 s 6 d when printed in a smaller font . It included a glossary compiled by WS Dallas. Book sales increased from 60 to 250 per month. [ 1 ] [ 89 ]

Publishing outside the UK

American botanist Asa Gray (1810-1888)
In the United States, botanist Asa Gray , an American colleague of Darwin's, negotiated with a Boston publisher to publish an authorized American version, but he learned that two New York publishers were already planning to exploit the absence of international copyright to print the constructions. [ 90 ] Darwin was delighted with the book's popularity and asked Gray to keep all the profits. [ 91 ] Gray was able to negotiate a 5% royalty with Appleton's of New York, [ 92 ]which released its edition in mid-January 1860, while the other two editors withdrew. In a letter from May, Darwin mentioned a print run of 2,500 copies, but it is unclear whether this referred to the first printing just because there were four that year. [ 80 ] [ 93 ]

The book was widely translated during Darwin's lifetime, but problems arose with the translation of concepts and metaphors, and some translations were influenced by the translator's own agenda. Darwin distributed presentation copies in France and Germany , hoping that suitable candidates would be presented, as translators were expected to make their own arrangements with a local publisher. He welcomed the distinguished aged naturalist and geologist Heinrich Georg Bronn , but the German translation published in 1860 imposed Bronn's own ideas, adding controversial themes that Darwin deliberately omitted. Bronn translated "favored races" as "improved races", and added essays on issues including theorigin of life , as well as a final chapter on religious implications partly inspired by Bronn's adherence to Naturphilosophie . [ 94 ] In 1862, Bronn produced a second edition based on the third English edition and additions suggested by Darwin, but died of a heart attack . Darwin corresponded closely with Julius Victor Carus , who published an improved translation in 1867. [ 95 ]Darwin's attempts to find a translator in France failed, and Clémence Royer's translation published in 1862 added an introduction praising Darwin's ideas as an alternative to religious revelation and promoting ideas that anticipated social Darwinism and eugenics , as well as several explanatory notes that presented answers to the doubts expressed by Darwin. The British biologist then corresponded with Royer about a second edition published in 1866 and a third in 1870, but he had difficulty getting the annotations removed and was concerned about these editions. [ 96 ] [ 97 ]He remained dissatisfied until a translation by Edmond Barbier was published in 1876. [ 80 ] A Dutch translation by Tiberius Cornelis Winkler was published in 1860. [ 98 ] In 1864, additional translations appeared in Italian and Russian. [ 99 ] During Darwin's lifetime Origin was published in Swedish in 1871, [ 100 ] Danish in 1872, Polish in 1873, Hungarian in 1873-1874, Spanish in 1877 and Serbian in 1878. In 1977 Originappeared in 18 additional languages, [ 101 ] including Chinese by Ma Chün-wu, who added non-Darwinian ideas; he published the preliminaries and chapters 1–5 in 1902–1904, and their complete translation in 1920. [ 102 ] [ 103 ]

Contents
Title and intro pages

John Gould 's illustration of the Darwin 's nandu was published in 1841. The existence of two species of rheas with overlapping intervals influenced Darwin.
Page ii contains quotations from William Whewell and Francis Bacon on the theology of natural laws , [ 104 ] harmonizing science and religion in accordance with Isaac Newton 's belief in a rational God who established a law-abiding cosmos. [ 105 ] In the second edition, Darwin added an epigraph by Joseph Butler asserting that God could work through scientific laws as well as through miracles , in a nod to the religious concerns of his older friends. [ 83 ] The Introductionestablishes Darwin's credentials as a naturalist and author, [ 106 ] then refers to John Herschel 's letter suggesting that the origin of species "would be considered natural in contrast to a miraculous process": [ 107 ]

Aboard the HMS Beagle , as a naturalist, I was very impressed by certain facts in the distribution of the inhabitants of South America and in the geological relations of the present with the ancient inhabitants of that continent. These facts seemed to me to throw some light on the origin of species - that mystery of mysteries, as it was called by one of our greatest philosophers. [ 108 ]

Darwin specifically refers to the distribution of the rheas species and that of the Galápagos tortoise and the thrush . He mentions his years of work on his theory and Wallace's coming to the same conclusion, which led him to "publish this summary" of his incomplete work. He describes his ideas and expounds the essence of his theory:

How many more individuals of each species are born than can survive; and as, consequently, there is an often recurring struggle for existence, it follows that any being, if it varies slightly in some way profitable to itself, under the complex and sometimes changing conditions of life, will have a better chance of surviving, and , therefore, be selected naturally. From the strong principle of inheritance, any variety selected will tend to propagate its new and modified form. [ 109 ]

Beginning with the third edition, Darwin prefaced the introduction with an outline of the historical development of evolutionary ideas. [ 110 ] In that sketch, he acknowledged that Patrick Matthew , unbeknownst to Wallace or himself, anticipated the concept of natural selection in an appendix to a book published in 1831; [ 111 ] in the fourth edition, he mentioned that William Charles Wells had done so as early as 1813. [ 112 ]

Variation under domestication and under nature
Chapter I covers animal and plant breeding , going back to Ancient Egypt . Darwin discusses contemporary views on the origins of different cultivated breeds to argue that many were produced from common ancestors through selective breeding . [ 113 ] As an illustration of artificial selection , he describes the breeding of pigeons, [ 114 ] noting that "[the] diversity of the races is something surprising", but that they all descended from a species of domestic pigeon . [ 115 ]Darwin saw two distinct types of variation: (1) rare abrupt changes that he called "sports" or "monstrosities" (example: ancon sheep with short legs) and (2) ubiquitous small differences (example: slightly shorter pigeons' beaks). or longer). [ 116 ] Both types of hereditary changes can be used by breeders. However, for Darwin, small changes were most important in evolution. In this chapter, Darwin expresses his erroneous belief that environmental change is necessary to generate variation. [ 117 ]

In Chapter II, Darwin specifies that the distinction between species and varieties is arbitrary, with experts disagreeing and changing their decisions when new forms are found. He concludes that "a well-marked variety may rightly be called an incipient species" and that "species are only strongly marked and permanent varieties." [ 118 ] He advocates the ubiquity of variation in nature. [ 119 ] Historians have noted that naturalists were aware that individuals of a species differed from one another, but generally regarded such variations as limited and unimportant deviations from the archetype .of every species, this archetype being an ideal fixed in the mind of God. Darwin and Wallace made variation between individuals of the same species fundamental to understanding the natural world. [ 114 ]

Struggle for existence, natural selection and divergence
In Chapter III, Darwin asks how the varieties "which I have called incipient species" become distinct species and, in response, presents the key concept he calls " natural selection "; [ 120 ] in the fifth edition he adds: "But the expression often used by Mr. Herbert Spencer , of survival of the fittest , is more accurate, and is sometimes equally convenient." [ 121 ]

Because of this struggle for life, any variation, however small and from whatever cause, if it is in any degree profitable to an individual of any species, in his infinitely complex relations with other organic beings and with external nature, will tend towards the preservation of that individual, and will generally be inherited by his descendants. ... I have called this principle, by which every slight variation, if useful, is preserved, by the term Natural Selection, in order to mark its relation to man's power of selection. [ 120 ]

He notes that both AP de Candolle and Charles Lyell stated that all organisms are exposed to severe competition. Darwin emphasizes that he used the phrase "struggle for existence" in "a broad and metaphorical sense, including the dependence of one being on another"; he gives examples ranging from plants that fight drought to plants that compete for birds to eat their fruit and spread their seeds. He describes the struggle resulting from population growth: "It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with manifold force to all the animal and plant kingdoms." He discusses checks for such an increase, including ecological interdependencies.complex and notes that competition is most severe between closely related forms "which occupy almost the same place in nature's economy". [ 122 ] Chapter IV details natural selection under the heading "infinitely complex and just ... mutual relations of all organic beings with each other and with their physical conditions of life." [ 123 ]Darwin takes as an example a country where a change in conditions led to the extinction of some species, migration of others, and, where appropriate variations occurred, descendants of some species adapted to the new conditions. He notes that artificial selection practiced by animal breeders has often produced marked divergences of character between races and suggests that natural selection can do the same, saying:

But how, it may be asked, can any analogous principle apply in nature? I believe it can and does apply most efficiently, from the simple circumstance that the more diverse the descendants of any species become in structure, constitution, and habits, the more they will be able to take advantage of the many and widely diverse places in the politics of nature, and thus be able to increase in number. [ 124 ]

Historians have noted that Darwin here anticipated the modern concept of the ecological niche . [ 125 ] He did not suggest that all favorable variations should be selected, nor that the favored animals were better or higher, but only more adapted to the environment.


This tree diagram, used to show the divergence of species, is the only illustration in Origin of Species .
Darwin proposes sexual selection , driven by competition between males for mates, to explain sexually dimorphic traits such as lion manes, stag antlers, peacock tails, birdsong, and the bright plumage of some male birds. [ 126 ] He analyzed sexual selection more fully in The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex(1871). Natural selection was expected to work very slowly at the formation of new species, but given the effectiveness of artificial selection, he could "see no limit to the amount of change, to the beauty and infinite complexity of the co-adaptations between all organic beings, with each other and with their physical conditions of life, which can be effected over time by nature's power of selection.” Using a tree diagram and calculations, he indicates the "character divergence" of the original species into new ones. species and genera. He describes the branches falling off when extinction took place, while new branches formed on the "great tree of life  ... with its ever-branching and beautiful branches". [ 127 ]

Variation and heredity
In Darwin's day, there was no consensual model of heredity ; [ 128 ] in Chapter I Darwin admitted, "The laws governing inheritance are quite unknown." [ 129 ] He accepted a version of the inheritance of acquired characteristics (which after Darwin's death came to be called Lamarckism ), and Chapter V discusses what he called the effects of use and disuse; he wrote that he thought that "there can be no doubt that use in our domestic animals strengthens and enlarges certain parts, while disuse diminishes them; and that such modifications are inherited," and that this also applies in nature. [ 130 ]Darwin claimed that some changes commonly attributed to use and disuse, such as the loss of functional wings in some island-dwelling insects, can be produced by natural selection. In later editions of On Origin , Darwin expanded the role assigned to the inheritance of acquired characteristics. Darwin also admitted not knowing the origin of hereditary variations, but speculated that they could be produced by environmental factors. [ 131 ] [ 132 ] However, one thing was clear: whatever the exact nature and causes of the new variations, Darwin knew, by observation and experiment, that breeders were able to select such variations and produce enormous differences after many years. selection generations. [116 ]

Reproduction of animals and plants showed related varieties varying in similar ways, or tending to revert to an ancestral form, and similar patterns of variation in distinct species were explained by Darwin as examples of common descent . He recounted how Lord Morton's mare apparently displayed telegony, an offspring that inherited traits from a previous mate from her mother, and accepted this process as an increase in the variation available to natural selection. [ 133 ] [ 134 ]

More details were given in Darwin's 1868 book on The Variation of Animals and Plants Under Domestication , which attempted to explain heredity through his pangenesis hypothesis . Although Darwin privately questioned the inheritance of mixture, he struggled with the theoretical difficulty that new individual variations would tend to merge in a population. However, inherited variation could be observed [ 135 ] and Darwin's concept of selection working on a population with a range of small variations was feasible. [ 136 ] It was only with the modern evolutionary synthesisIn the 1930s and 1940s a model of heredity became fully integrated into a model of variation. [ 137 ] This modern evolutionary synthesis has been dubbed "neo-Darwinian evolution" because it encompasses Charles Darwin 's theories of evolution with Gregor Mendel 's theories of genetic inheritance . [ 138 ]

Difficulties for the theory
Chapter VI begins by saying that the next three chapters will address possible objections to the theory, the first being that often no intermediate forms between closely related species are found, although the theory implies that such forms must have existed. As Darwin observed, "In the first place, why, if species descend from other species by insensibly subtle gradations, do we not everywhere see innumerable forms of transition? be, as we see them, well defined?” [ 139 ] Darwin attributed this to competition between different forms, combined with the small number of individuals of intermediate forms, often leading to the extinction of such forms. [ 140 ]]

Another difficulty, related to the first, is the absence or rarity of transient varieties over time. Darwin commented that by the theory of natural selection "innumerable transitional forms must have existed" and wondered "why don't we find them embedded in countless numbers in the earth's crust?" [ 141 ] (For a more in-depth discussion of these difficulties, see Speciation#Darwin's Dilemma: Why Do Species Exist? and Bernstein et al. [ 142 ] and Michod. [ 143 ] )

The chapter then deals with whether natural selection could produce complex specialized structures and the behaviors to use them, when it would be difficult to imagine how the intermediate forms could be functional. Darwin said:

Second, is it possible that an animal having, for example, the structure and habits of a bat, could have been formed by modifying some animal with totally different habits? We may believe that natural selection could produce, on the one hand, organs of insignificant importance, like a giraffe's tail, which functions like a fly tap, and, on the other hand, organs of such wonderful structure, like the eye, of the which we do not yet fully understand its inimitable perfection? [ 144 ]

His answer was that, in many cases, animals exist with intermediate structures that are functional. He presented flying squirrels and flying lemurs as examples of how bats might have evolved from non-flying ancestors. [ 145 ] He discussed several simple eyes found in invertebrates, starting with nothing more than a pigment-coated optic nerve , as examples of how the eyeof vertebrates could have evolved. Darwin concludes: "If it could be shown that any complex organ existed which could not have been formed by numerous successive slight modifications, my theory would be utterly destroyed. But I cannot discover such a case." [ 146 ] In a section on "organs of little apparent importance", Darwin discusses the difficulty of explaining several seemingly trivial traits with no evident adaptive function and describes some possibilities, such as correlation with useful traits. He accepts that "we are profoundly ignorant of the causes which produce slight and unimportant variations" which distinguish the breeds of domesticated animals [ 147 ] and thehuman "races" . He suggests that sexual selection may explain these variations: [ 148 ] [ 149 ]

I might have pleaded for this very purpose the differences between the races of man, which are so strongly marked; I may add that some light can apparently be shed on the origin of these differences, mainly through sexual selection of a particular type, but without going into too much detail here, my reasoning would seem frivolous. [ 150 ]

Chapter VII (of the first edition) deals with the evolution of instincts. His examples included two that he had investigated experimentally: slave ants and the construction of hexagonal cells by bees. Darwin observed that some slave ant species were more dependent on slaves than others, and he observed that many ant species collect and store pupae of other species for food. He thought it reasonable that species with extreme dependence on slave laborers had evolved in gradual stages. He suggested that bees that make hexagonal cells evolved in stages from bees that make round cells, under pressure from natural selection to save wax. Darwin concluded:

Finally, it may not be a logical deduction, but to my imagination it is far more satisfying to look at instincts like the young cuckoo expelling its foster brethren, - slave slaves - the larvae of ichneumonidae feeding on the living bodies of caterpillars - not as instincts especially endowed or created, but as small consequences of a general law, leading to the advancement of all organic beings, namely, to multiply, to vary, to let the strongest live and the weakest to die. [ 151 ]

Chapter VIII addresses the idea that species had special characteristics that prevented hybrids from being fertile in order to preserve separately bred species. Darwin said that far from being constant, the difficulty of producing hybrids of related species and the viability and fertility of the hybrids vary greatly, particularly between plants. Sometimes those that were widely considered separate species produced fertile hybrid offspring freely, and in other cases those that were considered mere varieties of the same species could only be crossed with difficulty. Darwin concluded: "Finally, then, the facts briefly presented in this chapter do not seem to me to be opposite, but even to support the view that there is no fundamental distinction between species and varieties." [152 ]

In the sixth edition, Darwin inserted the new Chapter VII (renumbering subsequent chapters) to respond to criticisms of earlier editions, including the objection that many features of organisms were not adaptive and could not have been produced by natural selection. He said that some of these traits could have been by-products of adaptive changes to other traits and that traits often appeared non-adaptive because their function was unknown, as shown in his book on Orchid Fertilization , which explains how their elaborate structures facilitate insect pollination. Much of the chapter responds to George Jackson Mivart 's criticisms, including his claim that features such as baleen filters in whales , flatfish with two eyes on one side, and the camouflage of stick insects could not have evolved through natural selection because the intermediate stages were not adaptable. Darwin proposed scenarios for the incremental evolution of each feature. [ 153 ]

geological record
Chapter IX addresses the fact that the geological record appears to show life forms suddenly appearing, without the numerous transitional fossils expected from gradual changes. Darwin borrowed Charles Lyell 's argument in Principles of Geology that the record is extremely imperfect, since fossilization is a very rare occurrence, spread over vast periods of time; since few areas were geologically explored, there could only be fragmentary knowledge of the geological formations.and the fossil collections were very poor. Evolved local varieties that migrated to a wider area appear to be the sudden appearance of a new species. Darwin did not expect to be able to reconstruct evolutionary history, but continued discoveries gave him well-founded hope that new discoveries would occasionally reveal transitional forms. [ 154 ] [ 155 ] To show that there was sufficient time for natural selection to work slowly, he cited the example of the Weald Basin in Great Britain , as discussed in Principles of Geology along with other observations by Hugh Miller , James Smith of Jordanhilland Andrew Ramsay . Combining this with an estimate of recent rates of sedimentation and erosion, Darwin calculated that erosion at Weald took about 300 million years. [ 156 ] The initial appearance of entire groups of well-developed organisms in the oldest fossil-bearing layers, now known as the " Cambrian Explosion ", posed a problem. Darwin had no doubt that earlier seas teemed with living creatures, but he claimed he had no satisfactory explanation for the lack of fossils. [ 157 ] Since then, fossil evidence of Precambrian life has been found, extending the history of life by billions of years.[ 158 ]

Chapter X examines whether patterns in the fossil record are better explained by common descent and branching evolution through natural selection than by the individual creation of fixed species. Darwin expected species to change slowly, but not at the same rate - some organisms like Lingula have remained unchanged since the earliest fossils. The pace of natural selection would therefore depend on variability and changes in the environment. This distanced his theory of Lamarcian laws from inevitable progress. [ 154 ] It has been argued that this anticipated the punctuated equilibrium hypothesis , [ 155 ] [ 159 ]] but other scholars have preferred to emphasize Darwin's commitment to gradualism. [ 160 ] He cited Richard Owenfindingsthat the first members of a class were a few simple, generalized species with characteristics intermediate between modern forms and were followed by increasingly diversified and specialized forms, corresponding to the branching off of common descent from an ancestor. The patterns ofextinctionmatched his theory, with specific groups of species continually existing until extinction, not reappearing thereafter. The recently extinct species were more similar to the living species than those of earlier ages, and as he had seen in theSouth America and William Clift had demonstrated in Australia , fossils from recent geological periods resembled species that still lived in the same area. [ 161 ]

Geographic distribution
Chapter XI deals with evidence from biogeography, starting with the observation that differences in flora and fauna of separate regions cannot be explained by environmental differences alone; South America, Africa and Australia all have regions with similar climates at similar latitudes, but these regions have very different plants and animals. Species found in one area of ​​a continent are more closely related to species found in other regions of that continent than to species found on other continents. Darwin observed that barriers to migration played an important role in differences between species in different regions. Coastal marine life on the Atlantic and Pacific sides of Central America had almost no species in common, although the Isthmus of Panamawas only a few kilometers wide. His explanation was a combination of migration and descent with modification. He went on to say, "Based on this principle of inheritance with modification, we can understand how it is that sections of genera , entire genera, and even families are confined to the same areas, as is so commonly and notoriously the case." [ 162 ]Darwin explained how a volcanic island formed a few hundred kilometers from a continent can be colonized by some species from that continent. These species would change over time, but would still be related to species found on the mainland, and Darwin noted that this was a common pattern. He discussed ways in which species could disperse across oceans to colonize islands, many of which he had investigated experimentally. [ 163 ]

Chapter XII continues the discussion of biogeography. After a brief discussion of freshwater species, he returns to oceanic islands and their peculiarities; for example, on some islands the roles played by mammals on the continents were played by other animals, such as flightless birds or reptiles. The summary of both chapters says:

... I think that all the great main facts of geographic distribution are explicable in the theory of migration (generally of the more dominant forms of life), together with the subsequent modification and multiplication of new forms. We can thus understand the great importance of barriers, whether terrestrial or aquatic, that separate our various zoological and botanical provinces. We can thus understand the location of subgenres, genera and families; and how is it that in different latitudes, for example in South America, the inhabitants of plains and mountains, of forests, swamps and deserts, are in such a mysterious way united by affinity and, in the same way, linked to the extinct beings that formerly inhabited the same continent... On the basis of these same principles, we can understand, as I have endeavored to show, why oceanic islands should have few inhabitants, but of these a large number should be endemic or peculiar; ...[ 164 ]

Classification, morphology, embryology, rudimentary organs
Chapter XIII begins by noting that classification depends on species being grouped into a Taxonomy , a multilevel system of groups and subgroups based on varying degrees of similarity. After discussing classification issues, Darwin concludes:

All the foregoing rules and aids and difficulties in classification are explained, if I am not too much mistaken, on the view that the natural system is founded on descent with modification; that the characters which naturalists regard as a true affinity between any two or more species, are those which have been inherited from a common parent, and so far all true classification is genealogical; this community of descent is the hidden bond that naturalists have unconsciously sought, ... [ 165 ]

Darwin discusses morphology , including the importance of homologous structures . He says, "What can be more curious than a man's hand, formed for grasping, a mole's hand for digging, a horse 's leg, a porpoise 's oar, and a bat 's wing , all built to the same pattern and with the same bones in the same relative positions?" This made no sense under the doctrines of independent creation of species, as even Richard Owen had admitted, but the "explanation manifests itself in the theory of natural selection of small successive modifications", showing common descent . [ 166 ]He notes that animals of the same class often have extremely similar embryos . Darwin discusses rudimentary organs such as the wings of flightless birds and the rudiments of the pelvis and leg bones found in some snakes . He notes that some rudimentary organs, such as the teeth of baleen whales , are found only in embryonic stages. [ 167 ] These factors also supported his theory of descent with modifications. [ 29 ]

Final considerations
The final chapter, "Recap and Conclusion," reviews the points of the earlier chapters, and Darwin concludes with the hope that his theory can produce revolutionary changes in many fields of natural history. [ 168 ] He suggests that psychology will be placed on a new foundation and implies the relevance of his theory to the first appearance of humanity with the phrase: "Light will be shed on the origin of man and his history." [ 29 ] [ 169 ] Darwin ends with a passage that has become well-known and much-quoted:

It is interesting to behold a tangled bank, covered with many plants of various kinds, with birds singing in the bushes, with various insects flying and with worms crawling through the damp earth, and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different from each other, and dependent on one another from the others in such a complex manner, were all produced by laws which act around us... Thus, from the war of nature, from famine and death, directly follows the most exalted object that we are capable of conceiving, namely , the production of higher animals. There is grandeur in this view of life, with its various powers, having been originally breathed into some forms or one; and that, while this planet continues to revolve according to the fixed law of gravity, from such a simple beginning the most beautiful and wonderful infinite forms were,[ 170 ]

Darwin added the phrase "by the Creator" from the second edition from 1860 onwards, so that the final sentence begins: "There is greatness in this view of life, with its various powers, having been originally breathed by the Creator in some forms or in one." [ 171 ]

Structure, style and themes
Nature and Structure of Darwin's Argument
Darwin's goals were twofold: to show that species were not created separately and to show that natural selection is the main agent of change. [ 172 ] He knew that his readers were already familiar with the concept of species transmutation presented in Vestiges and that his introduction fails to provide a viable mechanism. [ 173 ] Therefore, the first four chapters make their case that selection in nature, caused by the struggle for existence, is analogous to the selection of variations under domestication, and that the accumulation of adaptive variations provides a scientifically testable mechanism for evolutionary speciation . . [ 174] [ 175 ]

Later chapters provide evidence that evolution took place, supporting the idea of ​​adaptive and branching evolution, without directly proving that selection is the mechanism by which it occurs. Darwin presents supporting facts drawn from many disciplines, showing that his theory could explain a myriad of observations from many fields of natural history that were inexplicable under the alternative concept that species were created individually. [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] The structure of Darwin 's argument showed the influence of John Herschel , whose philosophy of science held that a mechanism could be called a vera causa(true cause) if three things could be demonstrated: its existence in nature, its ability to produce the effects of interest, and its ability to explain a wide range of observations. [ 178 ]

The Examiner 's review of December 3, 1859 commented: "Much of Mr. Darwin's volume is what ordinary readers would call 'hard reading'; that is, understanding requires concentrated attention and some preparation for the task. , this description is inappropriate, as many parts of the book abound in information that is easy to understand, instructive, and entertaining." [ 173 ] [ 179 ]

While the book could be read enough to sell, its aridity ensured that it was seen as intended for specialist scientists and that it could not be dismissed as mere journalism or imaginative fiction. Unlike the still popular Vestiges , in On the Origin of Species he avoided the narrative style of the historical novel and cosmological speculation, although the final sentence clearly suggested a cosmic progression. Darwin had long been immersed in the literary forms and practices of specialist science and made effective use of his skills in structuring arguments. [ 173 ] David Quammendescribed the book as written in everyday language for a large audience, but noted that Darwin's literary style was uneven: in some places he used complicated sentences that are difficult to read, while in other places his writing was beautiful. Quammen reported that later editions were weakened by the concessions Darwin made and the addition of detail to address his critics, and recommended the first edition of the work. [ 180 ] James T. Costa said that because the book was a hastily produced summary in response to Wallace's essay, it was more accessible than the large book on natural selection that Darwin was working on, which would have been obstructed by notes from academic footer and much more technical detail. He added that some parts ofOrigins are dense, but other parts are almost lyrical, with the case studies and observations presented in a narrative style uncommon in serious scientific books, which has broadened its audience. [ 181 ]

Human evolution
From his early transmutation notebooks in the late 1830s onwards, Darwin regarded human evolution as part of the natural processes he was investigating [ 182 ] and rejected the idea of ​​"divine intervention". [ 183 ] In 1856, his "great book on species" entitled Natural Selection would include a "note on Man", but when Wallace asked in December 1857, Darwin replied; "You ask whether I should discuss 'man';—I think I should avoid the whole subject, as it is surrounded by prejudices, though I fully admit that it is the highest and most interesting problem for the naturalist."185 ] On March 28, 1859, with the manuscript of the book in progress, Darwin wrote Lyell offering the publisher John Murray assurances "that I do not dispute the origin of man". [ 62 ] [ 63 ]

In the final chapter of Origin , "Recap and Conclusion", Darwin briefly highlights the human implications of his theory:

“In the distant future I see open fields for much more important research. Psychology will be based on a new foundation, that of the necessary acquisition of each mental power and capacity by gradation. Light will be shed on the origin of man and his history." [ 186 ]

Discussing this in January 1860, Darwin assured Lyell that "by the phrase [light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history], I show that I believe that man is in the same situation as other animals. [ 187 ] Many modern writers have seen this phrase as Darwin's only reference to humans in the book; [ 182 ] Janet Browne describes it as his only discussion of human origins, while noting that the book makes other references to humanity. [ 188 ]

A few other statements in the book are silently effective in pointing out the implication that humans are simply another species, evolving through the same processes and principles that affect other organisms. For example, [ 182 ] in Chapter III: "Struggle for Existence", Darwin includes "slowly reproducing man" among other examples of Malthusian population growth . [ 189 ] In his discussions of morphology , Darwin compares and comments on homologous bone structures between humans and other mammals. [ 190 ]

Darwin's early notebooks discussed how maladaptive traits might be selected for when animals or humans choose mates, [ 191 ] with "races" of humans differing over ideas of beauty. [ 192 ] In his 1856 notes in response to Robert Knox 's The Races of Man: A Fragment , he called this effect sexual selection . [ 193 ] He added notes on sexual selection to his "great book on species" and in mid-1857 added a section heading "Theory Applied to the Races of Man", but did not add text on this topic. [194 ]

In Origin , Chapter VI: "Difficulties of Theory", Darwin mentions this in the context of "slight and unimportant variations": [ 195 ]

I might have pleaded for this very purpose the differences between the races of man, which are so strongly marked; I may add that some light can apparently be shed on the origin of these differences, mainly through sexual selection of a particular type, but without going into too much detail here, my reasoning would seem frivolous." [ 195 ]

When Darwin published The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex twelve years later, he said that he had not gone into detail about human evolution in the Origin , as he thought it would "only increase prejudices against my views". He had not completely avoided the topic: [ 196 ]

It seemed enough to me to indicate, in the first edition of my 'Origin of Species', that through this work 'light would be thrown on the origin of man and his history'; and this implies that man must be included with other organic beings in any general conclusion concerning his manner of appearing on this earth. [ 196 ] [ 197 ]

Reception

In the 1870s, British caricatures of Darwin with the body of a non-human ape contributed to the identification of "evolutionism" with Darwinism . [ 198 ]
The book aroused international interest [ 199 ] and a wide debate, without a sharp line between the scientific issues and the ideological, social and religious implications of the work. [ 200 ] Much of the initial reaction was hostile, largely because very few reviewers really understood his theory, [ 201 ] but Darwin had to be taken seriously as a prominent and respected name in science. Samuel Wilberforce wrote a review in the Quarterly Review in 1860 [ 202 ] where he disagreed with Darwin's 'argument'. There was much less controversy than with the publicationVestiges of Creation in 1844, which was rejected by scientists but influenced a wide reading public to believe that nature and human society were governed by natural laws. [ 29 ] The Origin of Species, as a book of broad general interest, became associated with ideas of social reform. Its proponents made full use of an increase in publication from review journals, and it received more popular attention than almost any other scientific work, although it failed to match the continued sales of Vestiges . [ 203 ] Darwin's book legitimized scientific discussion of evolutionary mechanisms and the newly coined term Darwinismit was used to cover the full range of evolutionism, not just its own ideas. By the mid-1870s, evolutionism was triumphant.

Although Darwin was somewhat coy about human origins, not identifying any explicit conclusions on the matter in his book, he did give enough hints about the animal ancestry of humans for the inference to be made [ 204 ] [ 205 ] and the first revision claimed this by propagating the false idea of ​​"men from the apes" of Vestiges . [ 206 ] [ 207 ] Human evolution became central to the debate and was strongly argued by Huxley,who presented it in his popular "workers' lectures". Darwin did not publish his own views on this until 1871. [ 208 ] [ 209 ]

The naturalism of natural selection conflicted with presumptions of purpose in nature , and while this could be reconciled by theistic evolution , other mechanisms implying more progress or purpose were more acceptable. Herbert Spencer had already incorporated Lamarquism into his popular philosophy of a progressive free-market human society . He popularized the terms evolution and survival of the fittest , with many thinking that Spencer was central to evolutionary thinking. [ 210 ]

Impact on the scientific community
Scientific readers were already aware of arguments that species changed through processes subject to the laws of nature , but Lamarck's transmutational ideas and Vestiges ' vague "law of development" had not found scientific support. Darwin presented natural selection as a scientifically testable mechanism, although he accepted that other mechanisms, such as the inheritance of acquired characters, were also possible. His strategy established that evolution through natural laws was worthy of scientific study, and by 1875 most scientists accepted that evolution took place, but few thought that natural selection was significant. Darwin's scientific method was also contested, with its proponents favoring the empiricism of John Stuart Mill 's System of Deductive and Inductive Logic , while opponents defended the idealistic school of William Whewell 's Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences , in which investigation could begin. with the intuitive idea that species were fixed objects created through a preconceived project. [ 211 ]Initial support for Darwin's ideas came from the findings of field naturalists studying biogeography and ecology, including Joseph Dalton Hooker in 1860 and Asa Gray in 1862. Henry Walter Bates presented research in 1861 that explained insect mimicry using selection. Natural. Alfred Russel Wallace discussed evidence from his research on the Malay Archipelago , including an 1864 paper with an evolutionary explanation for Wallace's line . [ 212 ]


Huxley used illustrations to show that humans and apes had the same basic skeletal structure. [ 213 ]
Evolution had less obvious applications in anatomy and morphology , and at first had little impact on the research of anatomist Thomas Henry Huxley . [ 214 ] Despite this, Huxley strongly supported Darwin on evolution; though he called for experiments to show whether natural selection could form new species and questioned whether Darwin's gradualism was sufficient without sudden jumps to cause speciation . Huxley wanted science to be secular, without religious interference, and his article in the Westminster Review of April 1860 promoted scientific naturalism.on natural theology, [ 215 ] [ 216 ] praising Darwin for "extending the hold of science over regions of thought into which it has so far hardly penetrated" and coined the term " Darwinism " as part of his efforts to secularize and professionalize the science. [ 217 ] Huxley gained influence and started the X Club , which used the journal Nature to promote evolution and naturalism, shaping much of late Victorian-era science . Later, the German morphologist Ernst Haeckel would convince Huxley that comparative anatomy and paleontologycould be used to reconstruct evolutionary genealogies . [ 218 ]

The leading British naturalist was the anatomist Richard Owen , an idealist who shifted to the view in the 1850s that the history of life was the gradual unfolding of a divine plan. [ 219 ] Owen's review of the Origin in the Edinburgh Review of April 1860 attacked Huxley, Hooker, and Darwin bitterly, but also signaled the acceptance of a type of evolution as a teleological plane in a continuum of "ordered becoming", with new species appearing. by natural birth. Others who rejected natural selection but supported "creation by birth" included the Duke of Argyll , who explained the beauty of plumage by design .[ 220 ] [ 221 ] Since 1858, Huxley has emphasized anatomical similarities between apes and humans, contesting Owen's view that humans were a separate subclass. Their disagreement over human origins came to a head at the meeting ofthe British Association for the Advancement of Science, presenting the legendarydebate on evolution at Oxford in 1860. [ 222 ] [ 223 ] In two years of fierce public dispute thatCharles Kingsleylampooned as the "Great Hippocampus Question" and parodied in The Water-Babiesas the "big hippopotamus test", Huxley showed that Owen was incorrect in claiming that ape brains lacked a structure present in human brains. [ 224 ] Others, including Charles Lyell and Alfred Russel Wallace , thought that humans shared a common ancestor with apes, but higher mental faculties could not have evolved through a purely material process. Darwin published his own explanation in The Descent of Man (1871). [ 225 ]

Impact outside Great Britain

Haeckel presented a main "trunk" leading to humanity with secondary branches to various animals, as opposed to Darwin's branching evolutionary tree. [ 226 ]
Evolutionary ideas, though not natural selection, were accepted by German biologists accustomed to ideas of homology in the morphology of Goethe 's Metamorphosis of Plants and his long tradition of comparative anatomy. Bronn 's alterations to his German translation increased the doubts of conservatives but excited political radicals. Ernst Haeckel was particularly ardent, aiming to synthesize Darwin's ideas with those of Lamarck and Goethe while still reflecting the spirit of Naturphilosophie . [ 94 ] [ 227 ]His ambitious program to reconstruct the evolutionary history of life was accompanied by Huxley and supported by discoveries in paleontology . Haeckel used embryology extensively in his theory of recapitulation , which incorporated a progressive, quasi-linear model of evolution. Darwin was wary of these stories and had already noted that von Baer 's laws of embryology supported his idea of ​​complex branching. [ 226 ]

Asa Gray promoted and defended the Origin against those North American naturalists with an idealistic approach, notably Louis Agassiz , who saw each species as a distinct fixed unit in the Creator's mind, classifying as "species" what others considered merely varieties. [ 228 ] Edward Drinker Cope and Alpheus Hyatt reconciled this view with evolutionism in a form of neo-Lamarckism involving recapitulation theory. [ 227 ]

French-speaking naturalists in several countries showed appreciation for Clémence Royer 's heavily modified French translation , but Darwin's ideas had little impact in France, where any scientist who supported evolutionary concepts opted for a form of Lamarckism. [ 97 ] The intelligentsia in Russia had accepted the general phenomenon of evolution for several years before Darwin published his theory and scientists were quick to take it into account, although the Malthusian aspects were considered relatively unimportant. The political economy of struggle was criticized as a British stereotype by Karl Marx and Leo Tolstoy ., which caused the character Levin in his novel Anna Karenina to express severe criticism of the morality of Darwin's views. [ 99 ]

Challenges for natural selection
There were serious scientific objections to the process of natural selection as the key mechanism of evolution, including Karl von Nägeli 's insistence that a trivial trait without adaptive advantage could not be developed by selection. Darwin admitted that they may be linked to adaptive traits. His estimate that the age of the Earth allowed for gradual evolution was challenged by William Thomson (later awarded the title of Lord Kelvin) , who calculated that it had cooled in less than 100 million years. Darwin accepted the combined inheritance , but Fleeming Jenkincalculated that, by mixing traits, natural selection could not accumulate useful traits. Darwin attempted to address these objections in the fifth edition. Mivart supported directed evolution and compiled scientific and religious objections to natural selection. In response, Darwin made considerable changes in the sixth edition. The age of the earth and heredity problems were not resolved until the 20th century. [ 86 ] [ 229 ]

In the mid-1870s, most scientists accepted evolution but relegated natural selection to a lesser role, as they believed that evolution was purposeful and progressive. The range of evolutionary theories during " the eclipse of Darwinism " included forms of " saltationism " in which new species were thought to arise through "leaps" rather than gradual adaptation, forms of orthogenesis claiming that species had an inherent tendency to change. in a certain direction and forms of neo-Lamarckism in which the inheritance of acquired characteristics led to progress. August Weismann 's minority view , that natural selection was the only mechanism, was called neo- Darwinism .. The rediscovery of the Mendelian heritage was thought to invalidate Darwin's views. [ 230 ] [ 231 ]

Impact on economic and political debates
While some, like Spencer, used the analogy of natural selection as an argument against government intervention in the economy to benefit the poor, others, including Alfred Russel Wallace , argued that action was needed to correct social and economic inequalities to level the playing field. playing field before natural selection could further improve humanity. Some political commentaries, including Walter Bagehot 's Physics and Politics (1872), have attempted to extend the idea of ​​natural selection to competition between nations and between human races. These ideas were incorporated into what was already an ongoing effort by some anthropology researchers to provide scientific evidence for the superiority ofCaucasians about non-white races and justify European imperialism . Historians write that most of these political and economic commentators had only a cursory understanding of Darwin's scientific theory and were as heavily influenced by other concepts of progress and social evolution, such as the Lamarcian ideas of Spencer and Haeckel, as by Darwin's work, who was opposed to using his ideas to justify military aggression and unethical business practices, as he believed that morality was part of the aptitude of humans, and was opposed to polygenism , the idea that human "races" were fundamentally distinct and they did not share a recent common ancestry. [ 232 ]

religious attitudes
The book produced a wide range of religious responses at a time of changing ideas and increasing secularization . The issues raised were complex and there was a broad middle ground. Developments in geology meant that there was little opposition based on the literal reading of Genesis , [ 233 ] but the defense of the teleological argument and natural theology was central to debates about the book in the English-speaking world. [ 234 ] [ 235 ]


Liberal theologian Baden Powell defended evolutionary ideas by arguing that the introduction of new species should be considered a natural and not a miraculous process. [ 236 ]
Natural theology was not a unified doctrine, and while some, like Louis Agassiz, were strongly opposed to the book's ideas, others sought a reconciliation in which evolution was seen as purposeful. [ 233 ] In the Church of England , some liberal clergy interpreted natural selection as an instrument of God's design, with clergyman Charles Kingsley seeing it as "such a noble conception of the Godhead". [ 237 ] [ 238 ]In the second edition of January 1860, Darwin cited Kingsley as "a celebrated clergyman" and added "by the Creator" to the final sentence, which thereafter read "life, with its various powers, having been originally breathed in by the Creator." in some ways or in one". [ 171 ] While some commentators took this as a concession to religion that Darwin later regretted, [ 83 ] Darwin's view at the time was of God creating life through the laws of nature [ 239 ] [ 240 ] and even in first edition, there are several references to "creation". [ 241 ]

Baden Powell praised "Mr Darwin's magisterial volume [supporting] the great principle of nature's self-evolving powers". [ 242 ] In the United States, Asa Gray argued that evolution is the secondary effect, or modus operandi , of the first cause, design, [ 243 ] and published a pamphlet defending the book in terms of theistic evolution , Natural Selection is not inconsistent . with Natural Theology . [ 237 ] [ 244 ] [ 245 ] Theistic evolution has become a popular middle ground, andGeorge Jackson Mivart was among those who accepted evolution but attacked Darwin's naturalistic mechanism. Finally, it was realized that supernatural intervention could not be a scientific explanation and naturalistic mechanisms, such as neo-Lamarckism, were favored over natural selection because they were more compatible with the purpose. [ 233 ]

Even though the book did not spell out Darwin's beliefs about human origins , it did give a number of hints about the animal ancestry of humans [ 205 ] and quickly became central to the debate, as mental and moral qualities were seen as spiritual aspects. of the immaterial soul , and animals were believed to have no spiritual qualities. This conflict could be reconciled by assuming that there was some supernatural intervention in the way that led to humans, or by interpreting evolution as a purposeful and progressive ascension to humanity's position at the head of nature. [ 233 ] While many conservative theologians have accepted evolution,Charles Hodge argued in his 1874 review "What is Darwinism?" that " Darwinism ", defined strictly as including the rejection of design, was " atheism ", although he accepted that Asa Gray did not reject design. [ 246 ] [ 247 ] Asa Gray responded that this accusation misrepresented Darwin's text. [ 248 ] In the early 20th century, four notable authors of The Fundamentals were explicitly open to the possibility that God created through evolution, [ 249 ] but fundamentalism inspired theAmerican creation-evolution controversy that began in the 1920s. Some conservative Roman Catholic writers and influential Jesuits opposed evolution in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but other Catholic writers, beginning with Mivart, pointed out that the early Fathers of the Church did not interpret Genesis literally in this area. [ 250 ] The Vatican stated its official position in a 1950 papal encyclical , which maintained that evolution was not inconsistent with Catholic teaching. [ 251 ] [ 252 ]

modern influence

A modern phylogenetic tree based on genome analysis shows the three-domain system .
Several alternative evolutionary mechanisms favored during " the eclipse of Darwinism " became untenable as more was learned about inheritance and mutation . The full significance of natural selection was finally accepted in the 1930s and 1940s as part of the modern evolutionary synthesis . During this synthesis, biologists and statisticians, including RA Fisher , Sewall Wright , and JBS Haldane , blended Darwinian selection with a statistical understanding of Mendelian genetics . [ 231 ]

The theory of modern evolution continues to develop. Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection, with its model resembling a tree of branching common descent , became the unifying theory of the life sciences . The theory explains the diversity of living organisms and their adaptation to the environment. It makes sense, based on the geological record , biogeography, parallels in embryonic development , biological homologies , vestigiality , cladistics , phylogenetics , and other fields, with unparalleled explanatory power; has also become essential for applied sciences, asmedicine and agriculture. [ 253 ] [ 254 ] Despite scientific consensus, a religion-based political controversy has developed over how evolution is taught in schools, especially in the United States . [ 255 ]

Interest in Darwin's writings continues and scholars have generated an extensive literature, the Darwin Industry , on his life and work. The Origin text itself has been subject to much analysis, including a variorum , detailing the changes made in each edition, first published in 1959, [ 256 ] and a concordance , an exhaustive external index published in 1981. [ 257 ] The commemorations 150th anniversary of the publication of On the Origin of Speciesand the bicentennial of Darwin's birth were scheduled for 2009. They celebrated the ideas that "over the past 150 years have revolutionized our understanding of nature and our place in it." [ 258 ]

In a survey carried out by a group of academic booksellers, publishers and librarians ahead of Academic Book Week in the UK, On the Origin of Species was voted the most influential academic book ever written. [ 259 ] It was hailed as "the ultimate demonstration of why scholarly books matter" and as "one book changed the way we think about everything". [ 260 ]