biological evolution
"Evolution" redirects here. For other uses, see Evolution (disambiguation) .
"Evolutionism" redirects here. For other uses, see Evolutionism (disambiguation) .
featured article
Part of the series
biological evolution
Simplified tree of life
key themes
Evolutionary Biology
Introduction to Evolution
Common Ancestor
Evidence of Common Ancestor
history of the idea
General information
Renaissance and Enlightenment
Before Darwin
Darwin • His book
Before
Synthesis Modern evolutionary synthesis
Molecular evolution • Evo-devo
Natural History
History of life
Biodiversity • Biogeography
Classification • Cladistics
Paleontology • Phylogeny
Human evolution
Processes and Results
Population genetics
Variation
Mutation
Natural selection • Adaptation
Genetic drift • Gene flow
Speciation • Adaptive radiation
Cooperation • Coevolution
Extinction
Social Implications
Theory and facts
Social effects
Controversies
Objections
Level of acceptance
fields and applications
Applications of evolution
Artificial selection
Bioinformatics
Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary
computing
Experimental evolution
Ecological genetics Evolutionary
neuroscience Evolutionary
physiology Evolutionary
psychology
Systematics
Biology Portal
Category
Biological evolution is the change in phenotypic and genetic characters of biological populations through generations . This process has originated the diversity of life forms that exist on Earth from a common ancestor . 1 ​2​ Evolutionary processes have produced biodiversity at every level of biological organization , including species , population , individual organisms , and molecular levels ( molecular evolution). 3 All life on Earth stems from a last universal common ancestor that existed between 3.8 and 3.5 billion years ago. 4 ​5

The word evolution to describe such changes was first applied in the 18th century by the Swiss biologist Charles Bonnet in his work Consideration sur les corps organisés . 6 7 However, the concept that life on Earth evolved from a common ancestor had already been formulated by several Greek philosophers, 8 and the hypothesis that species continually transform was postulated by numerous scientists of the 18th and 19th centuries, whom Charles Darwin cited in the first chapter of his book On the Origin of Species . 9However, it was Darwin himself in 1859, 10 who synthesized a coherent body of observations and provided a mechanism of change, which he called natural selection ; which consolidated the concept of biological evolution into a true scientific theory. 2

Evolution as an inherent property of living beings is not, in the first decade of the 21st century, a matter of debate in the scientific community related to its study; 2 However, the mechanisms that explain the transformation and diversification of species are under intense and continuous scientific investigation.

Two naturalists, Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace , independently proposed in 1858 that natural selection was the basic mechanism responsible for the origin of new genotypic variants and ultimately new species. 1112 Currently , the theory of evolution combines the proposals of Darwin and Wallace with Mendel's laws and other later advances in genetics ; that is why it is called the modern synthesis or "synthetic theory." 2 According to this theory, evolution is defined as a change in the frequency of allelesof a population over generations. This change can be caused by different mechanisms, such as natural selection , genetic drift , mutation , and migration or gene flow . The synthetic theory currently receives general acceptance from the scientific community, although it also receives some criticism. It has been enriched since its formulation, around 1940, thanks to advances in other related disciplines, such as molecular biology , developmental genetics or paleontology . 13Currently, hypotheses about the mechanisms of evolutionary change continue to be made based on empirical data taken from living organisms. 14 ​15

Listen to this article
( info )

This audio narration was created from a specific version of this article and does not reflect possible subsequent editions.
More engraved items
Problems playing this file?
There's an audio version of this article.  Click here to learn more
Index
one	Evolution as a documented fact
1.1	Evidence of the evolutionary process
1.2	The origin of life
1.3	The evolution of life on Earth
two	Scientific theories about evolution
2.1	History of evolutionary thought
2.2	Darwinism
23	Neo Darwinism
2.4	Modern evolutionary synthesis
2.5	The extension of the modern synthesis
3	Modern evolutionary synthesis
3.1	Variability
3.1.1	Mutation
3.1.2	genetic recombination
3.1.3	Population's genetics
3.1.4	gene flow
3.2	The Mechanisms of Evolution
3.2.1	Natural selection
3.2.2	Genetic drift
3.3	The consequences of evolution
3.3.1	Adaptation
3.3.2	coevolution
3.3.3	speciation
3.3.4	Extinction
3.4	Microevolution and macroevolution
4	Extension of the modern synthesis
4.1	Paleobiology and rates of evolution
4.2	Environmental causes of mass extinctions
4.3	sexual selection and altruism
4.4	Macro Evolution, Promising Monsters, and Rated Balance
4.5	The synthesis of developmental biology and the theory of evolution
4.6	Microbiology and horizontal gene transfer
4.7	Endosymbiosis and the origin of eukaryotic cells
4.8	Variations in the expression of genes involved in heredity
5	Experiments and studies on the evolutionary process
5.1	Direct observation of the evolutionary process in bacteria
5.2	Computer simulation of the process of biological evolution
6	Impacts of the theory of evolution
6.1	Evolution and religion
6.2	Other theories of evolution and scientific criticism of the synthetic theory
6.2.1	Other minority hypotheses
7	See also
8	References
9	Recommended bibliography
10	external links
Evolution as a documented fact
Evidence of the evolutionary process
The evidence of the evolutionary process is the body of evidence that scientists have gathered to show that evolution is a characteristic process of living matter and that all organisms living on Earth descend from a last universal common ancestor . 16 Existing species are a stage in the evolutionary process, and their relative richness and levels of biological complexity are the product of a long series of speciation and extinction events . 17

The existence of a common ancestor can be inferred from simple characteristics of organisms. First, there is evidence from biogeography . The study of the distribution areas of the species shows that the further apart or isolated two geographical areas are, the more different the species that occupy them are, even though both areas have similar ecological conditions (such as the Arctic region and Antarctica , or the Mediterranean region and California ). Second, the diversity of life on Earth is not resolved in a completely unique set of organisms, but rather they share a large number of morphological similarities. Thus, when comparing theorgans of the different living beings, there are similarities in their constitution that indicate the kinship that exists between the species . These similarities and their origin allow organs to be classified as homologous , if they have the same embryonic and evolutionary origin, and analogous , if they have different embryonic and evolutionary origins but the same function. Third, anatomical studies also allow us to recognize the presence of vestigial organs in many organisms., which are reduced and have no apparent function, but clearly show that they are derived from functional organs found in other species, such as the rudimentary hindlimb bones found in some snakes . 2

Embryology , through comparative studies of the embryonic stages of different kinds of animals , offers the fourth set of evidence for the evolutionary process. It has been found that in these early stages of development , many organisms show common features that suggest the existence of a shared developmental pattern among them, which, in turn, demonstrates the existence of a common ancestor. The surprising fact that early embryonic mammals have gill slits , which then disappear as development proceeds, shows that mammals are related to fish . two​

The fifth set of evidence comes from the field of systematics . Organisms can be classified using the aforementioned similarities in hierarchically nested groups, much like a family tree . 1810 Although modern research suggests that, due to horizontal gene transfer , this tree of life may be more complicated than previously thought, as many genes have been distributed independently among distantly related species. 1920 _

Species that have lived in remote times have left records of their evolutionary history. Fossils , together with the comparative anatomy of current organisms, constitute the paleontological evidence of the evolutionary process. By comparing the anatomies of modern species with those already extinct, paleontologists can infer the lineages to which they belong. However, the paleontological approach to search for evolutionary evidence has certain limitations. In fact, it is particularly useful only in those organisms that have hard body parts, such as shells , teeth , or bones . Furthermore, certain other organisms, such asprokaryotes - the bacteria and archaea - have a limited number of common features, so their fossils do not provide information about their ancestors. 21

A more recent approach to finding evidence to support the evolutionary process is the study of biochemical similarities between organisms. For example, all cells use the same basic set of nucleotides and amino acids . 22 The development of molecular genetics has revealed that the evolutionary record resides in the genome of each organism and that it is possible to date the moment of the divergence of the species through the molecular clock produced by the mutations accumulated in the process of molecular evolution . 23For example, comparison of human and chimpanzee DNA sequences has confirmed the close similarity between the two species and shed light on when their common ancestor existed. 24

The origin of life
Main article: Abiogenesis
The origin of life , although it concerns the study of living beings, is a subject that is not addressed by the theory of evolution; because the latter only deals with the change in living beings, and not with the origin, changes and interactions of the organic molecules from which they come. 25 Not much is known about the earliest and most developmental stages of life, and attempts to unravel the earliest history of the origin of life generally focus on the behavior of macromolecules , because the scientific consensusThe current theory is that the complex biochemistry that constitutes life arose from simple chemical reactions, although controversies persist about how these reactions occurred. 26 It is also not clear what were the first developments of life ( protobionts ), the structure of the first living beings or the identity and nature of the last universal common ancestor . 27 28 Consequently, there is no scientific consensus on how life began, although it has been proposed that the start of life may have been self-replicating molecules such as RNA , 29 or assemblies of simple cells called nanocells. 30However, scientists agree that all extant organisms share certain characteristics - including the presence of cellular structure and genetic code - that would be related to the origin of life. 31

The biological reason that all living organisms on Earth must share a single last universal common ancestor is because it would be virtually impossible for two or more separate lineages to have independently evolved the many complex biochemical mechanisms common to all organisms. alive. 2232 It has been mentioned above that bacteria are the earliest organisms for which fossil evidence is available, cells being too complex to have arisen directly from non-living materials. 33The lack of geochemical or fossil evidence for earlier organisms has left a wide open field for hypotheses, which fall into two main ideas: 1) That life arose spontaneously on Earth. 2) That it was "seeded" from other parts of the universe.

The evolution of life on Earth

Phylogenetic tree showing the divergence of modern species from their common ancestor in the center. 34 ​The three domains are colored as follows; bacteria in blue, archaea in green, and eukaryotes in red.
Main article: Life story
Detailed chemical studies based on carbon isotopes from Archean Eon rocks suggest that the first forms of life probably emerged on Earth more than 3.8 billion years ago, in the Eoarchean era , and there is clear geochemical evidence —such as microbial reduction of sulphates― that attest to it in the Paleoarchaic era , 3470 million years ago. 35 The oldest stromatolites -rock layers produced by communities of microorganisms- are known in strata of 3.45 billion years, while the oldest threadlike microfossils, morphologically similar to cyanobacteria, are found in 3.45 billion year old flint strata found in Australia . 36 ​37 ​38

Also, molecular fossils derived from the lipids of the plasma membrane and the rest of the cell - called "biomarkers" - confirm that certain organisms similar to cyanobacteria inhabited the archaic oceans more than 2.7 billion years ago. These photoautotrophic microbes released oxygen into the atmosphere , which began to accumulate approximately 2.2 billion years ago and subsequently permanently transformed the Earth's atmosphere. 3938 The onset of photosynthesis and the subsequent emergence of an oxygen -rich atmosphereand non-reducing, it can also be traced through lamellar iron deposits and subsequent red bands, product of iron oxides . This was a necessary requirement for the development of aerobic cellular respiration , which is estimated to have emerged about 2 billion years ago. 40

Prokaryotes , then , inhabited the Earth from 3 to 4 billion years ago. 4142 Over the next few billion years, no significant change in cell morphology or organization occurred in these organisms. 43

The next major change in cell structure is the eukaryotes , which arose from ancient bacteria involved, included, in the structure of the ancestors of eukaryotic cells, forming a cooperative association called endosymbiosis . 44 The enveloped bacteria and their host cell began a process of coevolution , by which the bacteria gave rise to mitochondria or hydrogenosomes . 45 A second independent event of endosymbiosis with organisms similar to cyanobacteria led to the formation of chloroplasts in thealgae and plants . Both biochemical and paleontological evidence indicates that the first eukaryotic cells arose about 2 to 1.5 billion years ago, even though key attributes of eukaryotic physiology probably evolved earlier. 46 ​38 ​47

The history of life on Earth was that of unicellular eukaryotes, prokaryotes, and archaea until about 610 million years ago, when the first multicellular organisms appeared in the oceans in the so-called Ediacaran period . 414849 Some Ediacaran organisms may have been closely related to groups that would later become prominent; such as the porifera or the cnidarians . 50 However, due to the difficulty in deducing the evolutionary relationships in these organisms, some paleontologists have suggested that theThe Ediacaran biota represents a completely extinct branch , a "failed experiment" of multicellular life, which meant that later multicellular life later re-evolved from unrelated single-celled organisms. 49 The evolution of multicellular organisms then occurred in multiple independent events, in organisms as diverse as sponges , brown algae , cyanobacteria , slime fungi , and myxobacteria . 51

Shortly after the appearance of these first multicellular organisms, a great biological diversity appeared in a period of ten million years, in an event called the Cambrian explosion , a brief period in geological terms but which implied an unparalleled animal diversification and which is documented in fossils found in the sediments of the Burgess Shale , Canada . During this period, most animal phyla appeared in the fossil record, as well as a large number of unique lineages that later became extinct. Most modern animal body plans originated during this period. 52Various triggers for the Cambrian explosion have been proposed, including the accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere due to photosynthesis . 5354 Approximately 500 million years ago, plants and fungi colonized the land and were quickly followed by arthropods and other animals. 55 Amphibians appeared in Earth's history around 300 million years ago, followed by the first amniotes , then mammals around 200 million years ago, and birds100 million years ago. However, despite the evolution of these phyla, microscopic organisms, similar to those that evolved early in the process, continue to be highly successful and dominate the Earth since most species and terrestrial biomass are prokaryotes. . 37

Scientific theories about evolution
History of evolutionary thought
Main article: History of evolutionary thought

Anaximander , the Greek philosopher , offered a more elaborate idea, maintaining that "the basis of all matter is an eternal substance which transforms itself into all commonly known material forms. These forms, in turn, change and merge into others according to the rule of justice, that is, a kind of balance and proportion. 56
Various ancient Greek philosophers discussed ideas involving changes in living organisms over time. Anaximander ( ca. 610-546 BC) proposed that the first animals lived in water and that land animals were generated from them. 57 Empedocles (ca. 490-430 BC) wrote about a non-supernatural origin of living things, suggesting that adaptation does not require an organizer or final cause. 58 Aristotle(384-322 BC), one of the most influential Greek philosophers, is also the first naturalist whose work has been preserved in detail. Aristotle's works contain some very astute observations and interpretations along with various myths and errors that reflect the irregular state of knowledge in his time. 59 However, Aristotle's effort to expose the existing relationships between living beings as a scala naturae is notable -as described in Historia animalium― in which organisms are classified according to a hierarchical structure, “ladder of life” or “chain of Being”, ordering them according to the complexity of their structures and functions, with organisms showing greater vitality and capacity for movement described as "superior organisms". 6061 _

Some ancient Chinese thinkers expressed ideas about the change of biological species. Zhuangzi , a Taoist philosopher who lived around the 4th century BC. C. , mentioned that life forms have an innate ability or power (hua 化) to transform and adapt to their environment. 62 According to Joseph Needham , Taoismit explicitly denies the fixity of biological species, and Taoist philosophers speculated that they have developed different attributes in response to different environments. Indeed, Taoism refers to human beings, nature, and the sky as existing in a state of "constant transformation," in contrast to the more static view of nature typical of Western thought. 63


Portrait of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck .

Alfred Russell Wallace in 1895.

Ronald Fisher , biologist and statistician.
Although the idea of ​​biological evolution has existed since ancient times and in different cultures (for example, in the Muslim it was outlined in the 9th century by Al-Jahiz and in the 13th century by Nasir al-Din al-Tusi 64 ), the modern theory was not established until well into the 18th and 19th centuries ", with contributions from scientists such as Christian Pander , Jean-Baptiste Lamarck , and Charles Darwin . 65

In the eighteenth century the opposition between fixism and transformism was ambiguous. Some authors, for example, admitted the transformation of species limited to genera, but denied the possibility of passing from one genus to another. Other naturalists spoke of "progression" in organic nature, but it is very difficult to determine whether they were referring to a real transformation of the species or simply a modulation of the classical idea of scala naturae . 66

Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744-1829) formulated the first theory of evolution . He proposed that the great variety of organisms, which were accepted at that time, were static forms created by God, they had evolved from simple forms; postulating that the protagonists of this evolution had been the organisms themselves due to their ability to adapt to the environment: the changes in that environment generated new needs in the organisms and these new needs would entail a modification of them that would be heritable. He relied for the formulation of his theory on the existence of remains of extinct intermediate forms. 8With this theory Lamarck confronted the general belief that all species had been created and remained unchanged since their creation and also confronted the influential Georges Cuvier (1769-1832) who justified the disappearance of species, not because they were intermediate forms between the primitive and the current ones, but because they were different forms of life, extinguished in the different geological cataclysms suffered by the Earth. 6768 _


Cover of The Origin of Species .
It was not until the publication of Charles Darwin 's Origin of Species that the fact of evolution began to be widely accepted. A letter from Alfred Russel Wallace , in which he revealed his own discovery of natural selection, prompted Darwin to publish his work on evolution. Thus, credit is sometimes shared with Wallace for the theory of evolution (sometimes also called the Darwin–Wallace theory ). 61

The most interesting debate that took place in the evolutionary field was held by the French naturalists Georges Cuvier and Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire around the year 1830 in relation to uniformitarianism and catastrophism. 6970 _

Although Darwin's theory could profoundly shake scientific opinion regarding the development of life (and even resulting in a small social revolution), it could not explain the source of variation between species, and furthermore Darwin's proposal of the existence of a hereditary mechanism ( pangenesis ) did not satisfy most biologists. It was not until the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th that these mechanisms could be established. 71

When Gregor Mendel 's late 19th century work on the nature of heredity was "rediscovered" around 1900 , a discussion ensued between the Mendelians ( Charles Benedict Davenport ) and the biometricians ( Walter Frank Raphael Weldon and Karl Pearson ). ), who insisted that most paths important to evolution must show continuous variation that was not explainable through Mendelian analysis. Eventually the two models were reconciled and merged, primarily through the work of biologist and statistician Ronald Fisher . 67This combined approach, which employed a rigorous statistical model of Mendel's theories of inheritance via genes , became known in the 1930s and 1940s and is known as the synthetic theory of evolution . 72

In the 1940s, following Griffith's experiment , Avery , MacLeod , and McCarty were able to definitively identify deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA ) as the "transforming principle" responsible for the transmission of genetic information. 73 In 1953 , Francis Crick and James Watson published their famous work on the structure of DNA, based on the research of Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins . These developments began the era of molecular biologyand transformed the understanding of evolution into a molecular process .

In the mid-1970s, Motoo Kimura formulated the neutralistic theory of molecular evolution , firmly establishing the importance of genetic drift as the main mechanism of evolution. To date, debates continue in this area of ​​research. One of the most important is about the theory of punctuated equilibrium , a theory proposed by Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould to explain the scarcity of transitional forms between species . 74

Darwinism
Main article: Darwinism

Charles Darwin , father of the theory of evolution by natural selection .
Photography by Julia Margaret Cameron .
Historically, this state of evolutionary thought is represented by the publication in August 1858 of a joint work by Darwin and Wallace, 11 which was followed in 1859 by Darwin's book On the Origin of Species , which specifically refers to the principle of natural selection as the most important engine of the evolutionary process. Because Darwin accepted the Lamarckian principle of inheritance of acquired characters as a source of biological variability, it is appropriate to call this period of evolutionary thought the "Lamarck-Darwin-Wallace" period. 2

Reading the first paragraph of the Darwinism section
The 1858 work contained "a very ingenious theory to explain the appearance and perpetuation of varieties and specific forms on our planet" according to the words of the foreword written by Charles Lyell (1797-1895) and William Jackson Hooker (1785-1865) . . In fact, this work presented for the first time the hypothesisof natural selection. This hypothesis contained five fundamental claims: (1) all organisms produce more offspring than the environment can support; (2) there is abundant intraspecific variability for most characters; (3) competition for limited resources leads to a struggle "for life" (according to Darwin) or "for existence" (according to Wallace); (4) offspring with heritable modifications are produced; and (5) as a result, new species originate. 75

Unlike Wallace, Darwin supported his arguments with a wealth of facts, mostly drawn from interbreeding experiments and the fossil record. He also provided detailed and direct observations of organisms in their natural habitat. 76 Thirty years later, the co-discoverer of natural selection published a series of lectures under the title of "Darwinism" dealing with the same issues that Darwin had already dealt with, but in light of facts and data that were unknown. in the time of Darwin, who died in 1882. 77A detailed comparative analysis of the publications of Darwin and Wallace reveals that the latter's contributions were more important than is usually recognized, so much so that the phrase the "Darwin-Wallace mechanism of natural selection" has been proposed. to highlight its relevance. 78 ​79

However, Darwin was the first to summarize a coherent set of observations that solidified the concept of the evolution of life into a true scientific theory - that is, into a system of hypotheses. 80 The list of Darwin's proposals, extracted from The Origin of Species , is shown below: 2

1. The supernatural acts of the Creator are incompatible with the empirical facts of nature.

2. All life evolved from one or a few simple forms of organisms.

3. Species evolve from preexisting varieties through natural selection.

4. The birth of a species is gradual and long lasting.

5. Higher taxa (genera, families, etc.) evolve through the same mechanisms as those responsible for the origin of species.

6. The greater the similarity between taxa, the more closely related they are to each other and the shorter the time of their divergence from the last common ancestor.

7. Extinction is primarily the result of interspecific competition.

8. The geological record is incomplete: the absence of transitional forms between species and higher-ranking taxa is due to gaps in current knowledge.

Neo Darwinism
See also: Weismann barrier
Neo- Darwinism is a term coined in 1895 by the English naturalist and psychologist George John Romanes (1848-1894) in his work Darwin and after Darwin . The term describes a stage in the development of evolutionary theory dating back to the German cytologist and zoologist August Weismann (1834-1914), who in 1892 provided experimental evidence against Lamarckian inheritance and postulated that sexual reproduction in each generation creates a new and variable population of individuals. Natural selection, then, can act on that variability and determine the course of evolutionary change. 82Therefore, neo-Darwinism - that is, the extension of Darwin's theory - enriched Darwin's original concept, focusing on the way in which variability is generated and excluding Lamarckian inheritance as a viable explanation of the mechanism of inheritance. . Wallace, who popularized the term "Darwinism" by 1889,77 fully incorporated Weismann's new conclusions and was thus one of the earliest proponents of neo-Darwinism. 2

Modern evolutionary synthesis
Main article: Modern evolutionary synthesis
This system of hypotheses of the evolutionary process originated between 1937 and 1950. In contrast to the neo-Darwinian concept of Weismann and Wallace, the synthetic theory incorporated facts from diverse fields of biology, such as genetics , systematics , and paleontology . For this reason, the phrase "neo-Darwinian theory" should not be confused with "synthetic theory." 84 ​85

According to the vast majority of Biology historians, the basic concepts of the synthetic theory are essentially based on the content of six books, whose authors were: the Russian American naturalist and geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900–1975); the German American naturalist and taxonomist Ernst Mayr (1904-2005); British zoologist Julian Huxley (1887–1975); the American paleontologist George G. Simpson (1902–1984); the German zoologist Bernhard Rensch (1900–1990) and the American botanist George Ledyard Stebbins (1906–2000). 85

The terms "evolutionary synthesis" and "synthetic theory" were coined by Julian Huxley in his book Evolution: The Modern Synthesis (1942), in which he also introduced the term evolutionary biology instead of the phrase "study of evolution." 86 87 In fact, Huxley was the first to point out that evolution "should be considered the most central and the most important problem in biology and whose explanation should be approached by means of facts and methods of each branch of science, from ecology , genetics , paleontology , embryology , systematics up tocomparative anatomy and geographical distribution, without forgetting those of other disciplines such as geology , geography and mathematics ». 88

The so-called «modern evolutionary synthesis» is a robust theory that currently provides explanations and mathematical models on the general mechanisms of evolution or evolutionary phenomena, such as adaptation or speciation . Like any scientific theory, its hypotheses are subject to constant criticism and experimental verification. Theodosius Dobzhansky , one of the founders of the modern synthesis, defined evolution as follows: “Evolution is a change in the genetic composition of populations. The study of evolutionary mechanisms corresponds to population genetics». 89

The units of evolution are populations of organisms and not types. This way of thinking led to the "biological species concept" developed by Mayr in 1942: a community of interbreeding populations that is reproductively isolated from other communities. 9091 _
Phenotypic and genetic variability in plant and animal populations is produced by genetic recombination —reshuffling of chromosome segments —as a result of sexual reproduction and by randomly occurring mutations. The amount of genetic variation that a population of sexually reproducing organisms can produce is enormous. Consider the possibility of a single individual with a number "N" of genes , each with only two alleles . This individual can produce 2 N genetically different sperm or eggs . Because sexual reproduction involves two parents, each offspring can therefore possess one of the 4N different combinations of genotypes. Thus, if each parent has 150 genes with two alleles each—an underestimate of the human genome—each parent can give rise to more than 1045 genetically different gametes and more than 1090 genetically different offspring—a number very close to to estimates of the total number of particles in the observable universe.
Natural selection is the most important force shaping the course of phenotypic evolution. In changing environments, directional selection is of special importance, because it produces a shift in the population mean toward a novel phenotype that is better adapted to altered environmental conditions. Also, in small populations, random genetic drift —the loss of genes from the gene pool —can be significant.
Speciation can be defined as "a step in the evolutionary process (in which) forms...become incapable of hybridizing." 92 Various mechanisms of reproductive isolation have been discovered and studied in depth. The geographic isolation of the founding population is believed to be responsible for the origin of new species on islands and other isolated habitats. Allopatric speciation —divergent evolution of populations that are geographically isolated from one another—is likely to be the predominant speciation mechanism at the origin of many animal species. 93 However, sympatric speciation―the appearance of new species without geographic isolation― is also documented in many taxa, especially in vascular plants , insects , fish and birds . 94
The evolutionary transitions in these populations are usually gradual, that is, the new species evolve from the pre-existing varieties through slow processes and at each stage their specific adaptation is maintained.
Macroevolution -phylogenetic evolution above the species level or the appearance of higher taxa- is a gradual process, step by step, which is nothing more than the extrapolation of microevolution -the origin of races, varieties and species ―.
The extension of the modern synthesis

Graphic representation of the continuous expansion of evolutionary theory in terms of ideas, phenomena studied and fields of knowledge. The smallest ellipse represents the original Darwinism, the ellipse of intermediate size to the synthetic theory and the largest ellipse to the extended synthesis. The latter integrates at least ten additional scientific disciplines. Based on Kutschera and Niklas (2004) 2 and Pigliucci (2009). 95
The vertiginous advance of scientific knowledge in the last fifty years is making the neo-Darwinian concept of evolution outdated. The neo-Darwinian synthesis establishes natural selection as the basic mechanism of evolution. Through it, the environment selects among the genetic variability of populations, generated through the slow accumulation of random mutations, those combinations that favor the survival of organisms and, therefore, their ability to reproduce. 2

The fossil record , however, does not seem to support gradual change, which would be expected if genetic variability were the result of a slow, progressive accumulation of mutations. Rather the fossil record indicates evolution in leaps. That is, long periods without apparent changes in populations followed by rapid radiation in which a large number of new species appear. These radiations are usually after major catastrophic episodes in which a massive extinction of species occurs. 95

The necessary revision of evolutionary ideas is also favored by the new discoveries in molecular biology that are revealing a complexity of the genome that is far removed from the classic Mendelian vision of a linear arrangement of independent genes, on which the theory was built. synthetic. In contrast, the genome appears as a highly complex network of interconnected genes, subject to multiple cascading regulations, with mobile sequences capable of transposition and rearrangement. The processes of epigenetic regulation , the modularity of large protein complexes, the abundant presence of transposons and retrotransposons, the different reading patterns of a gene through messenger RNA processing and lateral gene transfer, are some of the aspects that emerge from the knowledge of the genome and that are hardly compatible with the idea of ​​the slow accumulation of mutations as the only causal agent of genetic variability.

Epigenetic modifications do not imply a change in the DNA nucleotide sequence, but rather consist of the reversible union of certain chemical groups to the DNA, which result in an alteration in the transcription capacity of genes. These epigenetic modifications occur more frequently than genetic changes, and can be inherited through the germ line, giving rise to heritable morphological changes in both plants and animals. Phenomena of parasexuality ( transformation , transduction , and conjugation ) have long been known in bacteria .), by which an organism acquires genetic information from another organism, in a process independent of reproduction. These processes of parasexuality involve a lateral or horizontal transfer of genes, since they are not transmitted from one generation to another, but within the same generation. Through these processes of horizontal gene transfer, any bacterium can acquire genes from other bacteria, which allow it to carry out activities for which its own DNA does not carry information. There is phylogenetic evidence for lateral gene transfer between eubacteria and archaea .. There is also evidence that through it the primitive eukaryotes, evolved from the archaea, acquired bacterial genes that were decisive for their metabolism. This ability to exchange bacterial genes from one species to another makes it very difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish the initial stages of bacterial evolution and casts reasonable doubt on the coherence of the phylogenetic tree of life, at least at its roots. Another key aspect in the evolutionary processes of life that has not been taken into consideration in the synthetic theory is symbiosis.. Symbiosis is a cooperative association between two organisms in which both benefit and from which a new, more complex structure emerges, with emergent properties that neither partner has separately. 96 95 97 98 99

Modern evolutionary synthesis
In Darwin's time, scientists did not know how traits were inherited. Currently, the origin of most inherited characteristics can be traced to persistent entities called genes , encoded in linear molecules of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in the nucleus of cells . DNA varies between members of the same species and also undergoes changes, mutations , or variations that occur through processes such as genetic recombination .

Variability
Main articles: Genetic variability and Population genetics .
The phenotype of an individual organism is the result of its genotype and the influence of the environment in which it lives and has lived. A substantial part of the variation between phenotypes within a population is caused by the differences between its genotypes. 100 The modern evolutionary synthesis defines evolution as the change of that genetic variation through time. The frequency of a particular allele will fluctuate, being more or less prevalent relative to other alternative forms of the same gene . Evolutionary forces act by directing these changes in allele frequencies in one direction or another. The variation of a population for a given gene disappears when aallele reaches the point of fixation, that is, when it has totally disappeared from the population or when it has entirely replaced all other alternative forms of that same gene. 101

Variability arises in natural populations by mutations in genetic material, migrations between populations ( gene flow ), and by the rearrangement of genes through sexual reproduction . Variability can also come from the exchange of genes between different species, for example through horizontal gene transfer in bacteria or interspecific hybridization in plants. 102 Despite the constant introduction of novel variants through these processes, most of the genome of a species is identical in all individuals belonging to that species. 103However, even small changes in the genotype can lead to substantial changes in the phenotype. Thus, chimpanzees and humans, for example, only differ in about 5% of their genomes. 104

Mutation
Main article: Mutation
Darwin did not know the source of the variations in individual organisms, but he noted that they seemed to occur randomly. In later works, most of these variations were attributed to mutation. Mutation is a permanent, transmissible change in the genetic material —usually DNA or RNA —of a cell , which can be caused by "copying errors" in the genetic material during cell division and by exposure to radiation , chemicals or the action of viruses . Random mutations constantly occur in the genome of all organisms, creating new genetic variability. 105106107 Mutationsmay have no effect on the phenotype of the organism, they may be detrimental or beneficial. For example, studies carried out on the fruit fly ( Drosophila melanogaster ), suggest that if a mutation determines a change in the protein produced by a gene, that change will be harmful in 70% of cases and neutral or slightly beneficial in the rest. 108

The mutation rate of a gene or DNA sequence is the frequency at which new mutations occur in that gene or sequence in each generation. A high mutation rate implies a greater potential for adaptation in the event of an environmental change, since it allows exploring more genetic variants, increasing the probability of obtaining the appropriate variant needed to adapt to the environmental challenge. In turn, a high mutation rate increases the number of harmful or deleterious mutations in individuals, making them less adapted and thus increasing the probability of population extinction. Due to the deleterious effects that mutations can have on organisms, 105 the optimal mutation rate for a population is a trade-off between costs and benefits.109 Each species has its own mutation rate that has been modulated by natural selection so that the species can cope in a more or less optimal way with the conflicting commitments of stability-change imposed by its environment. Viruses, for example, have a high mutation rate, 110 which may be an adaptive advantage as they must constantly and rapidly evolve to circumvent the immune systems of the organisms they affect. 111

Gene duplication introduces extra copies of a gene into the genome, thereby providing the starting material for the new copies to start their own evolutionary path. 112113114 For example , in humans four genes are needed to build the structures needed to sense light: three for color vision and one for night vision. All four genes have evolved from a single ancestral gene by duplication and subsequent divergence. 115 Likewise, duplicate genes can diverge enough to acquire new functions because the original copy continues to perform the original function. 116 ​117Other types of mutation can occasionally create new genes from so-called non-coding DNA . 118119 The creation of new genes may also involve small parts of several genes that have been duplicated, which recombine to form new DNA sequences with new functions. 120 ​121 ​122

Chromosomal mutations – also called chromosomal aberrations – are an additional source of hereditary variability. Thus, translocations , inversions , deletions , Robertsonian translocations , and duplications usually cause phenotypic variants that are passed on to offspring. For example, two chromosomes in the genus Homo fused to produce chromosome 2 in humans. Such chromosome fusion did not occur in the lineages of other apes, which have retained both separate chromosomes. 123Despite the phenotypic consequences that such chromosomal mutations may have, their most important evolutionary role is to accelerate the divergence of populations that have differences in their chromosomal constitution. Because individuals heterozygous for chromosomal aberrations are generally semi-sterile, gene flow between populations that differentiate for chromosomal rearrangements will be severely reduced. Thus, chromosomal mutations act as reproductive isolation mechanisms that allow different populations to maintain their identity over time. 124

DNA sequences that can move within the genome, such as transposons , make up a significant fraction of the genetic material of plants and animals and may have played a prominent role in their evolution. 125 Their mobility has an important consequence from the evolutionary point of view since when inserting or excising from the genome they can turn on, turn off, mutate or eliminate other genes and, therefore, create new genetic variability. 106 Likewise, certain sequences are repeated thousands or millions of times in the genome and many of them have been recruited to perform functions, such as the regulation of gene expression . 126

genetic recombination
Main article: Genetic recombination
See also: Evolution of sex
Genetic recombination is the process by which genetic information is redistributed by transposition of DNA fragments between two chromosomes during meiosis ―and more rarely in mitosis― . The effects are similar to those of mutations, that is, if the changes are not deleterious, they are transmitted to offspring and contribute to increasing diversity within each species .

In asexual organisms, genes are inherited together, or linked , since they do not mix with those of other organisms during the recombination cycles that usually occur during sexual reproduction. In contrast, the offspring of sexually reproducing organisms contain a random shuffling of their parents' chromosomes, which occurs during meiotic recombination and subsequent fertilization . 127 Recombination does not alter allele frequencies but rather modifies the association between alleles belonging to different genes, producing offspring with unique combinations of genes. 128Recombination generally increases genetic variability and can also increase rates of evolution. 129130131 However , the existence of asexual organisms indicates that this mode of reproduction may also be advantageous in certain environments, such as in apomictic plants or parthenogenetic animals . 132 ​Jens Christian Clausenhe was one of the first to formally recognize that apomixis, particularly facultative apomixis, does not necessarily lead to a loss of genetic variability and evolutionary potential. Using an analogy between the adaptive process and the large-scale production of automobiles, Clausen argued that a combination of sexuality (allowing the production of new genotypes) and apomixis (allowing unlimited production of the most adapted genotypes) could increase, rather than diminish, a species' capacity for adaptive change. 133

Recombination allows even genes that are found together on the same chromosome to be inherited independently. However, the rate of recombination is low ―approximately two events per chromosome and per generation―. As a result, genes that are physically close to each other tend to be inherited together, a phenomenon called linkage . 134 A group of alleles that are usually inherited together because they are linked is called a haplotype . When one of the alleles in a haplotype is highly beneficial, natural selection can lead to a selective sweep that will cause the other alleles within the haplotype to become more common within the population; this effect is calleddragging by linkage or «hitchhiking effect» (in English, genetic hitchhiking ). 135 When alleles cannot be separated by recombination, as is the case on the mammalian Y chromosome or in populations of asexual organisms, genes with deleterious mutations can accumulate, which is called Muller 's ratchet . in English). 136137 Thus , by disrupting linked sets of genes, sexual reproduction allows for the removal of deleterious mutations and the retention of beneficial ones. 138Furthermore, recombination and shuffling of genes can produce individuals with new and favorable genetic combinations. These positive effects are balanced by the fact that sex reduces the reproductive rate of populations of sexual organisms and can break the linkage between favorable combinations of genes. This cost of sex was first defined in mathematical terms by John Maynard Smith . In all sexual species, and with the exception of hermaphrodite organisms, each population is made up of individuals of two sexes, of which only one is capable of generating offspring. In an asexual species, on the other hand, all members of the population are capable of producing offspring. This implies that in each generation an asexual population can grow more rapidly. An additional cost of sex is that males and females must seek each other out to mate, and sexual selection often favors traits that reduce the fitness of individuals. 139138 The reasons for the evolution of sexual reproduction are still unclear and it is a question that constitutes an active area of ​​research in evolutionary biology , 140141 which has inspired ideas such as the Red Queen hypothesis . 142 This hypothesis, whose name was popularized by science writer Matt Ridley in his book The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature , holds that organisms are involved in a cyclical arms race with their parasites, leading to the speculation that the role of sex is to preserve genes that may be circumstantially unfavorable but potentially beneficial in the future in the face of future changes in parasite populations.

Population's genetics
As previously described, from a genetic point of view, evolution is an intergenerational change in the frequency of alleles within a population that shares the same genetic heritage. 143 A population is a group of individuals of the same species that share a geographic range. For example, all moths of the same species living in an isolated forest form a population. A given gene within the population can present various alternative forms, which are responsible for the variation between the different phenotypes of organisms. An example might be a coloration gene in moths that has two alleles: one for white and one for black. The heritage or gene poolis the complete set of alleles in a population, such that each allele appears a given number of times in a gene pool. The fraction of genes in the gene pool that are represented by a given allele is called the allele frequency , for example, the fraction of moths in the population that have the allele for color black. Evolution occurs when there are changes in allele frequency in a population of interbreeding organisms, for example, if the allele for color black becomes more common in a population of moths. 144

To understand the mechanisms that cause a population to evolve, it is helpful to know the conditions necessary for the population not to evolve. The Hardy-Weinberg principle states that the allele frequency of a sufficiently large population will remain constant only if the only force acting is random recombination of alleles during gamete formation and subsequent combination of alleles during fertilization . 145 In that case, the population is in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and, therefore, does not evolve. 144

gene flow

When male lions reach sexual maturity, they leave the group they were born into and settle in another pride to mate, ensuring gene flow between prides. 146
Gene flow is the exchange of genes between populations, usually of the same species. Gene flow within a species can be produced by the immigration and subsequent interbreeding of individuals from other populations or simply by the exchange of pollen between different populations. Interspecies gene transfer involves hybrid formation or horizontal gene transfer . 147

Immigration and emigration of individuals in natural populations can cause changes in allele frequencies, as well as the introduction -or removal- of allelic variants within an already established gene pool. Physical separations in time, space, or specific ecological niches that may exist between natural populations restrict or preclude gene flow. In addition to these restrictions on the exchange of genes between populations, there are others - called reproductive isolation mechanisms - which are the set of characteristics, behaviors and physiological processes that prevent members of two different species from interbreeding or mating with each other, producingoffspring or that it is viable or fertile. These barriers constitute an essential phase in the formation of new species since they maintain their own characteristics over time due to the fact that they reduce, or directly prevent, the genetic flow between individuals of different species. 148 149 150 151

Depending on how far two species have diverged from their most recent common ancestor , it may still be possible for them to be interfertile, as is the case with the mating of mare and donkey to produce the mule . 152 Such hybrids are generally sterile, due to chromosomal differences between the parental species and their inability to mate correctly during meiosis .. In this case, closely related species may interbreed regularly, but hybrids will be selected against. However, from time to time viable and fertile hybrids are formed, which may exhibit intermediate properties between their parent species, or possess an entirely new phenotype. 153 The importance of hybridization in the creation of new species of animals is not so clear, although there are well-documented examples such as the frog Hyla versicolor . 154 ​155

Hybridization is, however, an important mechanism of new species formation in plants, since polyploidy —the duplication of an organism's entire set of chromosomes—is more readily tolerated in plants than in animals, 156 157 and restores fertility in interspecific hybrids because each chromosome is capable of pairing with an identical partner during meiosis. 158 ​159

The Mechanisms of Evolution
There are two basic mechanisms of evolutionary change: natural selection and genetic drift . Natural selection favors genes that improve the organism's ability to survive and reproduce. Genetic drift is the random change in allele frequency , caused by random sampling of genes from one generation to the next. Gene flow is the transfer of genes within a population or between populations. The relative importance of natural selection and genetic drift in a population varies depending on the strength of selection and the effective population size, which is the number of individuals in that population capable of reproducing. 160Natural selection tends to predominate in large populations, while genetic drift predominates in small ones. The prevalence of genetic drift in small populations can lead to the fixation of even slightly deleterious mutations. 161 As a result, changes in the size of a population can significantly influence the course of evolution. the bottlenecksin populations ―situations that lead to a drastic temporary decrease in effective size― determine a loss or erosion of genetic variability and therefore lead to the formation of genetically more uniform populations. Bottlenecks can also be the result of alterations in gene flow, such as reduced migration, expansion into new habitats, or population subdivision. 160

Natural selection
Main article: Natural selection

Diagram showing how mutations and natural selection interact to cause changes in populations of organisms.

Biston betularia typical form.

Biston betularia form carbonaria .

The two typical and carbonaria forms of the Biston betularia moth perched on the same trunk. The typical form , light in color, is hardly observable on this tree that is not blackened by soot, which camouflages it from predators, such as Parus major .
Natural selection is the process by which genetic mutations that improve reproductive capacity become, and remain, more and more frequent in successive generations of a population. It is often called a "self-evident mechanism," for it is the necessary consequence of three simple facts: (a) within populations of organisms there is heritable variation (b) organisms produce more offspring than can survive, and (c ) such offspring have different abilities to survive and reproduce. 162

The central concept of natural selection is the biological fitness of an organism. 163 Fitness, fit, or fitness is the measure of an organism's genetic contribution to the next generation. 163 However, fitness is not simply equal to the total number of offspring of a given organism, as it also quantifies the proportion of subsequent generations that carry that organism's genes. 164 For example, if an organism can survive and reproduce but its offspring are too small or sickly to reach reproductive age, the genetic contribution of that organism to future generations will be very low, and thus its fitness will also be low. is. 163​

Therefore, if one allele increases fitness more than other alleles of the same gene, with each generation the allele will become more common within the population. Such traits are said to be 'selected for'. Examples of traits that can increase fitness are improved survival or increased fecundity . Instead, the lower fitness caused by a less beneficial or deleterious allele makes the allele increasingly rare and is said to be "selected against." 165 It should be emphasized that the fitness of an allele is not a fixed trait: if the environment changes, traits that were previously neutral or deleterious may become beneficial, and vice versa. 166 For example, the moth Biston betulariaIt has two colors, a light one called the typical form and a dark one called the carbonaria form . The typical form , as its name indicates, is the most frequent in this species. However, during the industrial revolution in the UKthe trunks of many of the trees on which the moths roosted were blackened by soot, giving the dark-colored moths an advantage in hiding from predators. This gave moths of the melanistic form a better chance of surviving to produce more dark-colored offspring. Only fifty years after the first melanistic moth was discovered, almost all the moths in the industrial area of Manchester were dark. This process was reversed by the " Clean Air Act " of 1956, by which industrial pollution was reduced and dusky moths, more easily visible to predators, became rare again. 167

However, even if the direction of selection changes, the traits that were lost in the past cannot be obtained again in an identical way - a situation described by Dollo's Law or "Law of evolutionary irreversibility" -. 168 According to this hypothesis, a structure or organ that has been lost or discarded during the course of evolution will not appear again in that same lineage of organisms. 169170 According to Richard Dawkins , this hypothesis is "a statement about the statistical improbability of following exactly the same evolutionary path twice or, indeed, the same particular path in both directions". 171

Within a population, natural selection for a certain continuously varying trait, such as height, can be categorized into three different types. The first is "directional selection," which is a change in the mean value of a trait over time; for example, when organisms are getting taller. 172 Second is "disruptive selection" which is the selection of the extreme values ​​of a certain trait, which often determines that the extreme values ​​are more common and that the selection acts against the mean value. This would imply that short and tall organisms have an advantage, but those of medium height do not. Finally, in the "stabilizing selection", the selection acts against the extreme values, which determines a decrease in thevariance around the mean and lower population variability for that particular trait. 162173 This would , for example, make all the organisms in a population gradually acquire a similar height.

A special type of natural selection is sexual selection , which is selection in favor of any trait that increases reproductive success by increasing an organism's attractiveness to potential mates. 174 Traits that evolved through sexual selection are especially prominent in males of some species, although certain traits—such as bulky horns, mating calls, or bright colors—may attract predators, reducing the males' chances of survival. . 175 However, this reproductive disadvantage is offset by greater reproductive success for males exhibiting these sexually selected traits. 176

An area of ​​active study is the so-called "selection unit"; Natural selection has been said to act at the level of genes, cells, individual organisms, groups of organisms, and even species. 177178 Neither of these models is mutually exclusive, and selection can act on multiple levels at once. 179 For example, below the level of the individual, there are genes called transposons that attempt to replicate throughout the genome. 180 Selection above the level of the individual, like group selection, may allow the evolution of cooperation. 181

Genetic drift
Main article: Genetic drift

Simulation of the genetic drift of twenty unlinked alleles in populations of 10 (top) and 100 (bottom). The drift towards fixation is faster in the small population.
Genetic drift is the change in allele frequency from one generation to the next, and it occurs because the alleles in the offspring are a random sample from the parents, and because of the role of chance in determining whether a given specimen will survive and reproduce. 101 In mathematical terms, alleles are subject to sampling errors. As a result, when selective forces are absent or relatively weak, allele frequencies tend to "drift" up or down randomly (in a random walk). This drift stops when one allele finally becomes fixed, that is, it either disappears from the population or totally replaces the rest of the genes. Thus, genetic drift can eliminate some alleles from a population simply by chance. Even in the absence of selective forces, genetic drift can cause two separate populations that start out with the same genetic makeup to separate into two divergent populations with a different set of alleles. 182

The time required for an allele to become fixed by genetic drift depends on the size of the population; fixation occurs faster in smaller populations. 183 The precise measure of populations that is important in this case is called the effective population size, which was defined by Sewall Wright as the theoretical number of breeding individuals with the same observed degree of inbreeding.

Although natural selection is responsible for adaptation, the relative importance of the two forces, natural selection and genetic drift, in driving evolutionary change in general is currently a field of research in evolutionary biology. 184 These investigations were inspired by the neutralistic theory of molecular evolution , which posits that most evolutionary changes result from the fixation of neutral mutations, which have no immediate effect on the fitness of an organism. 185 Thus, in this model, most genetic changes in a population are the result of constant mutational pressure and genetic drift. 186

The consequences of evolution
Adaptation

Homologous bones of tetrapod limbs . The bones of all four animals have the same basic structure, but have been adapted to specific uses.
Adaptation is the process by which a population becomes better suited to its habitat and also the change in the structure or functioning of an organism that makes it more suited to its environment. 187188 This process takes place over many generations, 189 is produced by natural selection , 190 and is one of the basic phenomena of biology. 191

The importance of an adaptation can only be understood in relation to the total biology of the species. Julian Huxley 192

In fact, a fundamental principle of ecology is the so-called competitive exclusion principle : two species cannot occupy the same niche in the same environment for a long time. 193 Consequently, natural selection will tend to force species to adapt to different ecological niches in order to minimize competition between them. 194

Adaptation is first of all a process rather than a physical part of a body. 195 The distinction can be seen, for example, in trematodes - internal parasites with very simple body structures but a very complex life cycle - in which their adaptations to such an unusual environment are not the product of characters observable to the naked eye. sight but in critical aspects of its life cycle. 196 However, the concept of adaptation also includes those aspects of organisms, populations or species that are the result of the adaptive process. By using the term 'adaptation' for theevolutionary process and «adaptive feature or character» for the product thereof, the two meanings of the concept are perfectly distinguished. The definitions of these concepts, due to Theodosius Dobzhansky , are basic. Thus, "adaptation" is the evolutionary process by which an organism becomes more capable of living in its habitat or habitats, 197 while "adaptability" is the state of being adapted, that is, the degree to which an organism organism is capable of living and reproducing in a given set of habitats. 198Finally, an "adaptive character" is one of the aspects of the pattern of development of an organism, which allows or increases the probability of survival and reproduction. 199

Adaptation can cause either the gain of a new characteristic or the loss of an ancestral function. An example showing both types of change is the adaptation of bacteria to selection by antibiotics , with genetic changes causing antibiotic resistance due to altered drug target or increased transporter activity. that extract the drug out of the cell. 200 Other notable examples are the laboratory evolution of Escherichia coli bacteria so that they may be able to use citric acid as a nutrient, when wild-type bacteria cannot, 201the evolution of a new enzyme in Flavobacterium that allows these bacteria to grow on the by-products of nylon manufacturing , 202203 and the evolution of an entirely new metabolic pathway in the soil bacterium Sphingobium that allows it to degrade the pesticide synthetic pentachlorophenol . 204205 An interesting idea, although still controversial, is that some adaptations can increase the capacity of organisms to generate genetic diversity and to adapt by natural selection ―that is, they would increase the capacity for evolution― 206207


A whale skeleton , a and b fin bones , both of which are adaptations of forelimb bones, while c indicates vestigial hindlimb bones, suggesting an adaptation from terrestrial to aquatic habit. 208
Adaptation occurs through the gradual modification of existing structures. Consequently, structures with similar internal organization may have different functions in related organisms. This is the result of a single ancestral structure that has been adapted to function in different ways. The wing bones of bats , for example, are very similar to those of mouse feet and primate hand bones , because all of these structures descend from a common mammalian ancestor. 209 Since all living organisms are related to some extent, even organs that appear to have little or no similar structure, such as the eyes ofarthropods , from the squid and from vertebrates, or the limbs and wings of arthropods and vertebrates, may depend on a common set of homologous genes that control their assembly and function, which is called deep homology . 210 ​211

During adaptation, some structures may lose their original function and become vestigial structures . 212 These structures may lack functionality in an extant species, however they may have had a clear function in the ancestral species or in other closely related species. Examples include pseudogenes , 213 the nonfunctional remains of the eyes of blind cave fish, 214 wings in flightless bird species, 215 and the presence of hip bones in whales and snakes . 208Examples of vestigial structures also exist in humans, including wisdom teeth , 216 coccyx , 212 vermiform appendix , 212 and even behavioral vestiges such as goosebumps 217 and other reflexes . primitives . 218 219 220 221

However, many features that appear to be simple adaptations are in fact exaptations : structures originally adapted for one function, but coincidentally made useful for some other function in the process. An example is the African lizard Holaspis guentheri which developed a very flat head to hide in crevices, a fact that can be seen in its close relatives. However, in this species, the head has become so flattened that it allows it to slide from tree to tree. 222 The swim bladders of teleost fish are another example of exaptation since, although they derive directly from the lungsof the ancestral lungfish, are used as a buoyancy regulator. 223

An area of ​​current research in evolutionary developmental biology is the developmental basis of adaptations and exaptations. 224 This area of ​​research addresses the origin and evolution of embryonic development and how changes in developmental processes generate new features. 225 These studies have shown that evolution can alter development to create new structures, such as the bony structures of embryos that develop in the jaw in some animals, instead forming part of the middle ear in mammals. 226It is also possible that structures that have been lost in evolution reappear due to changes in developmental genes, such as a mutation in chickens that causes embryos to develop crocodile -like teeth. . 227 In fact, it is becoming increasingly clear that most alterations in the shape of organisms are due to changes in a small set of conserved genes. 228

coevolution
Main article: Coevolution
The interaction between organisms can produce conflict or cooperation. When two different species interact, such as a pathogen and a host, or a predator and its prey , the species can develop complementary sets of adaptations. In this case, the evolution of one species causes adaptations in the other. In turn, these changes in the second species cause adaptations in the first. This cycle of selection and response is called coevolution . An example is the production of tetradotoxin by the Oregon newt and the evolution of a resistance to this toxin in its predator, the garter snake.. In this predator-prey pair, the evolutionary arms race has produced high levels of toxin in the newt, and correspondingly high levels of resistance in the snake. 230

speciation
Main article: Speciation
Speciation (or cladogenesis ) is the process by which one species diverges into two or more descendant species. 231 Evolutionary biologists view species as statistical phenomena and not as categories or types. This approach is counterintuitive, as the classical species concept remains very entrenched, with the species viewed as a class of organisms exemplified by a " type specimen ", which possesses all the characteristics common to that species. Instead, a species is now defined as a lineage that shares a single gene pool .and evolve independently. This definition has fuzzy boundaries, even though both genetic and morphological properties are used to help differentiate closely related lineages. 232 In fact, the exact definition of the term "species" is still under discussion, particularly for organisms based on prokaryotic cells ; 233​ is what is called the "species problem". 234 Various authors have proposed a series of definitions based on different criteria, but the application of one or the other is ultimately a practical matter, depending in each specific case on the particularities of the group of organisms under study. 2. 3. 4Currently, the main unit of analysis in biology is the population , an observable set of interacting individuals , rather than the species, an observable set of individuals that resemble each other .


Schematic illustrating the spatial aspects of different modes of speciation . Allopatric speciation – A physical barrier divides the population. Peripatric speciation – A small founding population conquers an isolated niche. Parapatric speciation : a new niche is conquered adjacent to the original population. Sympatric speciation: Speciation occurs without physical separations.
Speciation has been observed on multiple occasions both under controlled laboratory conditions and in nature. 235 In sexually reproducing organisms, speciation is the result of reproductive isolation followed by genealogical divergence. There are four modes of speciation. The most common in animals is allopatric speciation , which takes place in populations that are initially geographically isolated, as in the case of habitat fragmentation or migrations. Under these conditions, selection can cause very rapid changes in the appearance and behavior of organisms. 236 ​237As selection and drift act independently on populations isolated from the rest of their species, separation can ultimately create organisms that cannot reproduce with each other. 238

The second mode of speciation is peripatric speciation , which occurs when small populations of organisms become isolated in a new environment. It differs from allopatric speciation in that the isolated populations are numerically much smaller than the parent population. Here, the founder effect causes rapid speciation through rapid genetic drift and selection in a small gene pool. 239

The third mode of speciation is parapatric speciation . It resembles peripatric speciation in that a small population colonizes a new habitat, but differs in that there is no physical separation between the two populations. Instead, speciation is the result of the evolution of mechanisms that reduce gene flow between the two populations. 231 Generally, this occurs when there has been a drastic change in the environment within the habitat of the parent species. An example is the herb Anthoxanthum odoratum , which can undergo parapatric speciation in response to localized metal contamination from mines. 240In this case, plants evolve with a resistance to high levels of metals in the soil. Selection against crosses with the metal-sensitive parent species results in a shift in the flowering time of metal-resistant plants, causing reproductive isolation. Selection against hybrids between two populations can cause reinforcement, as is the differentiation of those traits that promote reproduction within the species, as well as character displacement, which is when two species become more different in appearance in the area where they overlap. 241

Finally, in sympatric speciation , species diverge without geographic isolation or habitat change. This modality is rare, as even a small amount of gene flow can eliminate genetic differences between parts of a population. 242 In general, in animals, sympatric speciation requires the evolution of genetic differences and non-random mating, so that reproductive isolation can develop. 243

One type of sympatric speciation is the crossing of two related species to produce a new hybrid species. This is unusual in animals, since animal hybrids are usually sterile, since during meiosis the homologous chromosomes of each parent, being from different species, cannot successfully pair. It is more common in plants, as plants often double their number of chromosomes, to form polyploids. 244 This allows the chromosomes of each parent species to form a complementary pair during meiosis, since the chromosomes of each parent are already represented by a pair. 245 An example of this type of speciation is when the plant species Arabidopsis thaliana and Arabidopsis arenosathey interbred to produce the new species Arabidopsis suecica . 246 This took place approximately 20,000 years ago, 247 and the speciation process has been repeated in the laboratory, allowing the genetic mechanisms involved in this process to be studied. 248 In fact, chromosome duplication within a species can be a common cause of reproductive isolation, as half of the duplicated chromosomes will be left unpaired when they mate with unduplicated organisms. 234

Speciation episodes are important in punctuated equilibrium theory , which sees patterns in the fossil record of rapid moments of speciation interspersed with relatively long periods of stasis, during which species remain largely unchanged. 249In this theory, speciation and rapid evolution are related, with natural selection and genetic drift acting particularly strongly on organisms that undergo speciation into new habitats or small populations. As a result, periods of stasis in the fossil record correspond to the parent population, and organisms that undergo speciation and rapid evolution are found in small populations or geographically restricted habitats, so they are rarely preserved as fossils. 250

Extinction
Main article: Extinction
Extinction is the disappearance of an entire species. Extinction is not an unusual event, as species often appear by speciation, and disappear by extinction. 251 In fact, practically all animal and plant species that have lived on Earth are currently extinct, 252 and it seems that extinction is the final destiny of all species. 253 These extinctions have taken place continuously throughout life's history, although the rate of extinction increases dramatically in occasional extinction events . 254 The Cretaceous–Tertiary extinction , during which the dinosaurs became extinct, is the best known, but the earliestPermo-Triassic extinction was even more severe, causing the extinction of nearly 96% of species. 254 The Holocene extinction is a mass extinction that is still ongoing and is associated with the expansion of humanity across the globe in recent millennia. The current rate of extinction is 100 to 1,000 times higher than the average rate, and up to 30% of species may be extinct by the middle of the 21st century. 255 Human activities are currently the main cause of this extinction which is still ongoing; 256​ it is possible that global warming will accelerate further in the future. 257

The role that extinction plays in evolution depends on what type of extinction it is. 254 The causes of the continuing "low-level" extinctions, which make up the majority of extinctions, are not well understood and could be the result of competition between species for limited resources ( competitive exclusion ). 2 If competition from other species alters the probability of a species becoming extinct, this could place species selection as a level of natural selection. 177 Intermittent mass extinctions are also important, but instead of acting as a selective force, they drastically reduce diversity indiscriminately and promote explosions of extinction.rapid evolution and speciation in survivors. 258

Microevolution and macroevolution
Main articles: Microevolution and Macroevolution .
Microevolution is a term used to refer to small-scale changes in gene frequencies in a population over the course of several generations. These changes can be due to a number of processes: mutation, gene flow, genetic drift, as well as natural selection. 259 Population genetics is the branch of biology that provides the mathematical framework for the study of microevolutionary processes, such as skin color in the world population.

Changes on a larger scale, from speciation (appearance of a new species) to large evolutionary transformations that occur over long periods, are commonly called macroevolution (for example, amphibians that evolved from a group of bony fish). Biologists do not usually make an absolute separation between macroevolution and microevolution, since they consider that macroevolution is simply microevolution accumulated and subjected to a greater range of environmental circumstances. 260A minority of theorists, however, believe that the mechanisms of the synthetic theory for microevolution are not sufficient to make such an extrapolation and that other mechanisms are needed. The theory of punctuated equilibria, proposed by Gould and Eldredge, tries to explain certain macroevolutionary trends that are observed in the fossil record.

Extension of the modern synthesis
In recent decades it has become evident that evolutionary patterns and mechanisms are much more varied than those postulated by the pioneers of evolutionary biology (Darwin, Wallace or Weismann) and the architects of synthetic theory (Dobzhansky, Mayr and Huxley, among others). New concepts and information in developmental molecular biology, systematics, geology, and the fossil record of all groups of organisms need to be integrated into what has been called "extended evolutionary synthesis." The aforementioned fields of study show that evolutionary phenomena cannot be understood only through the extrapolation of the processes observed at the level of modern populations and species. 261 ​262 ​263264 67In the next sections the aspects considered as the extension of the modern synthesis are presented.

Paleobiology and rates of evolution
Average longevities of species
in various groups of organisms. 265 ​266 ​267
group of organisms	average longevity
(in millions of years)

Bivalves and marine gastropods	10 to 14
Benthic and planktonic foraminifera	20 to 30
marine diatoms	25
Trilobites (extinct).	> 1
Ammonites (extinct).	5
freshwater fish	3
snakes	>2
mammals	1 to 2
bryophytes	> 20
Upper floors . Herbs	3 to 4
Angiosperms . trees and bushes	27 to 34
Gymnosperms . conifers and cycads	54
At the time that Darwin proposed his theory of evolution, characterized by small and successive modifications, the available fossil record was still very fragmentary. Furthermore, fossils prior to the Cambrian period were totally unknown . Darwin's dilemma, that is, the apparent lack of Precambrian fossil records , was used as the main argument against his proposal that all organisms on Earth stem from a common ancestor. 2

In addition to the lack of a complete fossil record, Darwin was also concerned about the apparent absence of intermediate forms or connecting links in the fossil record, which challenged his gradualistic view of speciation and evolution. In fact in Darwin's time, with the exception of Archeopteryx , which displays a mixture of bird and reptilian characteristics, virtually no other examples of intermediate forms or missing links , as they were colloquially called, were known. 2

By 1944, when Simpson's book Tempo and mode in evolution was published, both inconveniences could not be corrected because at that time no Precambrian fossils were known either and there were only a few examples of intermediate forms in the fossil record that linked the ancient forms with the derived ones. Neither of Darwin's dilemmas or concerns exist today. Scientists have explored the Precambrian period in detail and life is known to be much older than was believed in Darwin's time. It is also known that these ancient life forms were the ancestors of all subsequent organisms on the planet. Likewise, in the last 20 years, a large number of representative examples of intermediate fossil forms have been discovered, described and analyzed that link the main groups of vertebrates and even fossils of the firstflowering plants . 3738 As a result of these and other scientific advances, paleontology (originally a branch of geology ) has developed into a new discipline called paleobiology . 37 261 268 269 270 271 272

An example of a transitional form between fish and amphibians is the extinct genus Panderichthys , which inhabited the earth about 370 million years ago and is the intermediate link in the series Eustenopteron (fish, 380 million years) - Panderichthys - Acanthostega (amphibians , 363 million years). 273 Amphibians and terrestrial vertebrates presented an intermediate form, Pederpes , 350 million years old that links the main aquatic amphibians of the Late Devonian with early tetrapods . 274Likewise, the evolutionary history of various groups of extinct organisms, such as the dinosaurs, has been reconstructed in remarkable detail. 275 The link between reptiles and mammals is Thrinaxodon , a reptile with mammalian features that inhabited the planet 230 million years ago. The link between dinosaurs and birds is Microraptor , a four-winged, hovering dromaeosaurid that lived 126 million years ago, representing the intermediate state between theropods and primitive flying birds such as Archeopteryx . 277 The transitional form between terrestrial mammals and thesea ​​cow is Pezoriren , a primitive quadrupedal merman with terrestrial and aquatic adaptations that lived 50 million years ago. 278 Hoofed land mammals and whales are connected through the extinct genera Ambulocetus and Rodhocetus that inhabited the planet 48 to 47 million years ago. 279 To end this list of examples of transitional forms, the ancestor of chimpanzees and humans is the genus Sahelanthropus , a hominidapelike that exhibited a mosaic of chimpanzee and hominin characters and inhabited Africa 7 to 5 million years ago. 280

In his book Variation and evolution in plants (1950), Stebbins also lamented the lack of a fossil record to understand the origin of the first flowering plants, the angiosperms . In fact, Darwin himself characterized the origin of angiosperms as an "abominable mystery." However, this knowledge gap is rapidly being filled by the discoveries made since the end of the 20th century and up to the present. In 1998 , a fossil of an axis with fruits was discovered in China , in the strata from the Upper Jurassic (more than 125 million years old), which has been named Archaefructus 281Such a discovery, which seemed to date back to the age of the oldest angiosperms, made the Yixian Formation , where this fossil was discovered, world famous. Some years later, the fossil of another angiosperm, Sinocarpus , was also discovered in this same formation. 282 In 2007 the finding of a perfect flower in the Yixian Formation was reported. This flower has the typical organization of angiosperms, including the presence of tepals , stamens , and gynoecium . This species has been baptized as Euanthus (from the Greek, "true flower") by its discoverers, and indicates that in the Lower CretaceousFlowers like those of today's angiosperms already existed. 283

Environmental causes of mass extinctions

Mass extinctions have played a fundamental role in the evolutionary process.
Darwin not only discussed the origin but also the decline and disappearance of species. As an important cause of the extinction of populations and species he proposed interspecific competition due to limited resources: during evolutionary time, superior species would arise to replace less adapted species. This perspective has changed in recent years with a greater understanding of the causes of mass extinctions , episodes in Earth's history where the "rules" of natural selection and adaptation seem to have been abandoned. 254 ​2

This new perspective was foreshadowed by Mayr in his book Animal species and evolution in which he pointed out that extinction must be considered one of the most conspicuous evolutionary phenomena. Mayr discussed the causes of extinction events and proposed that new diseases (or new invaders of an ecosystem) or changes in the biotic environment may be responsible. Furthermore, he wrote:

"The actual causes of extinction of any fossil species will presumably always remain uncertain... It is true, however, that any serious extinction event is always correlated with a major environmental disturbance" (Mayr, 1963). 284 ​)

This hypothesis, not supported by facts when it was proposed, has since gained considerable support. The term "mass extinction", mentioned by Mayr 285 but without an associated definition, is used when a large number of species become extinct in a geologically short time; events may be related to a single cause or a combination of causes, and extinct species are plants and animals of all sizes, both marine and terrestrial. 269 At least five mass extinctions have occurred, leaving many ecological gaps that have been allowed to be filled by descendants of surviving species: the Cambrian-Ordovician mass extinction , theOrdovician-Silurian mass extinctions , the Devonian mass extinction , the Permian-Triassic mass extinction, and the Cretaceous-Tertiary mass extinction . 286

The biological extinction that occurred in the Permian-Triassic about 250 million years ago represents the most serious extinction event in the last 550 million years. It is estimated that around 70% of the families of terrestrial vertebrates, many woody gymnosperms, and more than 90% of oceanic species became extinct in this event. Various causes have been proposed to explain this event, including volcanism, asteroid or comet impact, ocean anoxia, and environmental change. However, it is now apparent that gigantic volcanic eruptions, occurring over a time interval of only a few hundred thousand years, were the main cause of the biosphere's catastrophe during the late Permian. 287The Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary records the second largest mass extinction event. This global catastrophe wiped out 70% of all species, among which the dinosaurs are the most popularly known example. Small mammals survived to inherit vacant ecological niches, allowing for the ascent and adaptive radiation of lineages that would ultimately become Homo sapiens . 270 Paleontologists have proposed numerous hypotheses to explain this event, the most accepted today are those of the impact of an asteroid 288 and volcanism phenomena. 270

In short, the hypothesis of environmental disturbances as causes of mass extinctions has been confirmed, indicating that while much of the history of evolution may be gradual, from time to time certain catastrophic events have set its background rhythm. It is evident that the few "lucky survivors" determine the subsequent patterns of evolution in the history of life. 2254 _

sexual selection and altruism

Male peacock with all its plumage displayed.
Certain characteristics in a species are sexually attractive even though they have no other adaptive significance. For example, in some bird species, males can swell their necks to an extraordinary extent which is attractive to females, so males that can swell their necks exaggeratedly are selected over the generations. Darwin concluded that while natural selection guides the course of evolution, sexual selection influences its course even though there seems to be no obvious reason for it. Darwin's arguments in favor of sexual selection appear in the fourth chapter of The Origin of Species and, especially, inThe Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex of 1871. In both cases, the analogy with the artificial world is used:

[Sexual selection] does not depend on a struggle for existence but on a struggle between males for possession of females; the result is not the death of the unsuccessful competitor, but little or no offspring. Sexual selection is therefore less stringent than natural selection. Generally, the more vigorous males, those that are better adapted to their places in the wild, will leave more progeny. But in many cases victory will not depend on vigor but on special weapons exclusively for the male sex[...] Among birds, the struggle is usually of a more peaceful nature. All who have dealt with the matter believe that there is a deep rivalry between the males of many species to attract females by song. The rock thrush of Guiana,

Darwin 1859:136-137)
In his book The Descent of Man he described numerous examples, such as the peacock 's tail and the lion 's mane.. Darwin argued that competition between males is the result of selection for traits that increase the mating success of competing males, traits that could, however, decrease the individual's chances of survival. In fact, bright colors make animals more visible to predators, the long plumage of male peacocks and birds of paradise, or the huge antlers of deer are awkward burdens at best. Darwin knew that natural selection could not be expected to favor the evolution of such clearly disadvantageous traits, and he proposed that they arose by sexual selection.

which depends not on a struggle for existence in relation to other organic beings or external conditions, but on a struggle between individuals of one sex, usually males, for possession of the other sex. Darwin, 1871.

For Darwin, sexual selection fundamentally included two phenomena: the preference of females for certain males - intersexual , female , or epigamic selection - and, in polygamous species, the battles of males for the largest harem - intrasexual selection―. In the latter case, large body size and musculature provide advantages in combat, while in the former, it is other male traits, such as colorful plumage and complex courtship behavior, that are selected in favor of increasing male attention. the females. Darwin's ideas in this regard were not widely accepted, and proponents of the synthetic theory (Dobzhansky, Mayr, and Huxley) largely ignored the concept of sexual selection.

The study of sexual selection only gained momentum in the post-synthesis era. 289 It has been argued that Wallace (and not Darwin) first proposed that males with brilliant plumage thereby demonstrated their good health and high quality as sexual partners. According to this "sexual selection of good genes" hypothesis, male mate choice by females offers an evolutionary advantage. 78 This perspective has received empirical support in recent decades. For example, an association, albeit a small one, between offspring survival and male secondary sexual characteristics has been found in a large number of taxa, such as birds , amphibians , fish , andinsects ). 290 In addition, research with blackbirds has provided the first empirical evidence that there is a correlation between a secondary sexual character and a trait that increases survival since males with the brightest colors have a stronger immune system. 291 Thus, female selection could promote the general health of populations in this species. These and other data are consistent with the concept that female choice influences male traits and may even be beneficial to the species in ways that have no direct bearing on mating success. 289


Eusocial insects .
In the same context and since the publication of the Origin of Species , it has been argued that altruistic behavior , selfless acts performed for the benefit of others, is incompatible with the principle of natural selection. However, altruistic behavior, such as parental care of young and mutualism , has been observed and documented throughout the animal kingdom , from invertebrates to mammals. 292 293 294 295 One of the most notorious forms of altruism occurs in certain eusocial insects , such as ants, bees , and wasps , which have a class of sterile workers. The general question of the evolution of altruism, of the sociability of certain insects, or of the existence of worker bees or ants that leave no offspring has been answered by inclusive fitness theory , also called family selection theory . 296According to the Darwin/Wallace principle, natural selection acts on differences in the reproductive success (RE) of each individual, where ER is the number of living offspring produced by that individual during a lifetime. Hamilton (1972) extended this idea to include the ER effects of the individual's relatives: inclusive fitness is the ER of each individual, plus the ER of his relatives, each devalued by the corresponding degree of relatedness. Numerous studies in a wide variety of animal species have shown that altruism does not conflict with evolutionary theory. For this reason, it is necessary to modify and expand the traditional view that selection operates on a single isolated organism in a population:297 298299

Macro Evolution, Promising Monsters, and Rated Balance
Main articles: Promising Monster and Scored Balance .
When macroevolution is defined as the process responsible for the emergence of higher-ranking taxa, metaphorical language is being used. In fact, only new species "arise", since the species is the only taxon that has ontological status. 300 Macroevolution accounts for the emergence of important morphological discontinuities between species, which is why they are classified as markedly differentiated groups, that is, belonging to different and high-ranking taxonomic units. In the mechanisms that explain the emergence of these discontinuities that the different conceptions and disciplinary approaches are opposed.


Graphical representation of the conceptual differences between gradualism and punctuated equilibrium in relation to morphological divergence over time.
Gradualism is the orthodox macroevolutionary model. He explains macroevolution as the product of slow change, the accumulation of many small changes over time. This gradual change should be reflected in the fossil record with the appearance of numerous transitional forms between groups of organisms. However, the record is not abundant in intermediate forms. The gradualists attribute this discrepancy between their model and the evidence found to the imperfection of the geological record itself (in Darwin's terms, the geological record is a narrative from which some volumes and many pages have been lost). The Punctuated Equilibrium Model―proposed in 1972 by N. Eldredge and SJ Gould― maintains instead that the fossil record is a faithful reflection of what actually happened. Species appear suddenly in geological strata, are found there for 5 to 10 million years without major morphological changes, and then abruptly disappear from the record, replaced by another related but different species. Eldredge and Gould use the terms stasis and interruption, respectively, to designate these periods. According to their model, the abrupt interruptions in the fossil record of a species would reflect the moment in which it was replaced by a small peripheral population - in which the rate of evolution would have been faster - that competed with the original species and ended up replacing it. . According to this pattern,

In evolutionary biology , a promising monster is an organism with a profoundly mutant phenotype that has the potential to establish a new evolutionary lineage. The term is used to describe a saltational speciation event , which can contribute to the production of new groups of organisms. The phrase was coined by the German geneticist Richard Goldschmidt who thought that small, gradual changes, which satisfactorily explain microevolutionary changes , cannot explain macroevolution . The evolutionary relevance of promising monsters has been rejected or questioned by many scientists who defend theSynthetic theory of biological evolution. 301 In his work The material basis of evolution , Goldschmidt wrote that "the change from one species to another is not a change that does not involve more and more atomistic changes, but a complete modification of the main pattern or from the main reaction system into a new one, which can later again produce intraspecific variation by means of micromutations». 302

Goldschmidt's thesis was universally rejected and widely ridiculed within the scientific community, who favored the neo - Darwinian explanations of RA Fisher , JBS Haldane, and Sewall Wright . 303

Nonetheless, several lines of evidence suggest that promising monsters play a significant role in the origin of key innovations and novel body plans by saltational rather than gradual evolution. 301 Stephen Jay Gould argued in 1977 that regulatory genes or sequences offered some support for Goldschmidt's postulates. Indeed, he argued that instances of rapid evolution do not undermine Darwinism, as Goldsmidt supposed, but neither do they deserve immediate discredit, as many neo-Darwinists thought. 304 Gould insisted that Charles Darwin 's belief in gradualism was never an essential component of his theory of evolution fornatural selection . Thomas Henry Huxley also warned Darwin that he had burdened his work with unnecessary difficulty by unreservedly adopting the principle Natura non facit saltum . 305 Huxley feared that this assumption might discourage those naturalists who believed that cataclysms and great evolutionary leaps played a significant role in the history of life. In this regard, Gould wrote:

As a Darwinian, I wish to defend Goldschmidt's postulate that macroevolution is not simply extrapolated microevolution and that large structural transitions can occur rapidly without a series of smooth intermediate states... In his 1940 book, Goldschmidt specifically invokes genes for development as promising potential monster makers. 304

The synthesis of developmental biology and the theory of evolution

HOX genes in mice.
Historians of science have long pointed out that one of the major biological disciplines, developmental biology (formerly called embryology ), was not part of the evolutionary synthesis, although this branch of biology was discussed in detail by Darwin. Ernst Mayr in his essay What was the evolutionary synthesis? ("What was the evolutionary synthesis?") 13 described that several of the embryologists of the period in which the modern synthesis was being built had a position contrary to evolutionary theory and noted that:

'Representatives of some biological disciplines, for example developmental biology, offered strong resistance to synthesis. They were not left out of the synthesis, as some of them are now claiming, they just didn't want to join."

In the last two decades, however, this lack of involvement of embryology within the synthetic theory has been remedied. In fact, developmental biology and evolutionary biology have merged to form a new branch of biological research called Evolutionary Developmental Biology , or colloquially "Evo-devo," which explores how developmental processes have evolved. and how, ultimately, the plans for the development of the various body parts of organisms of the past and of present organisms have been achieved. 306

The most important factor responsible for the synthesis of developmental biology with the theory of evolution was the discovery of a group of regulatory genes called the family of homeotic genes ( HOX genes ). These genes encode DNA-binding proteins ( transcription factors ) that profoundly influence embryonic development . 307 For example, the suppression of insect abdominal limbs is determined by functional changes in a protein called Ultrabithorax, which is encoded by a Hox gene. 308Importantly, the Hox gene family has been identified in arthropods (insects, crustaceans , chelicerates , myriapods ), chordates ( fish , amphibians , reptiles , birds , mammals ), and there are analogs among plant and fungal species . 307 HOX genes play a very important role in the morphogenesis of vertebrate embryos, since they provide regional information along the anteroposterior axis of the body. This gene family is both functionally and structurally homologous to the Drosophila melanogaster homeotic complex (HOM-C) . Based on the comparison of genes from various taxa, it has been possible to reconstruct the evolution of HOX gene clusters in vertebrates. The 39 genes that comprise the HOX gene family in humans and mice, for example, are organized into four genomic complexes located on different chromosomes, HOXA on the short arm of chromosome 7 , HOXB on 17 , HOXC on 12 , and HOXD on chromosome 7. the 2 , and each of them comprises 9 to 11 genesarranged in a sequence homologous to the one they have in the D. melanogaster genome . 309 Although the common ancestor of the mouse and human lived around 75 million years ago, the distribution and architecture of their HOX genes are identical. 310 Thus, the HOX gene family is very old and apparently highly conserved, which has profound implications for the evolution of developmental patterns and processes. 310 ​306 ​307

Microbiology and horizontal gene transfer
Main article: Horizontal gene transfer
Microbiology was practically ignored by early evolutionary theories. This was due to the paucity of morphological traits and the lack of a species concept particularly among prokaryotes . 311 Now, evolutionary researchers are taking advantage of their increased understanding of physiology and ecology , offered by the relative ease of microbial genomics, to explore the taxonomy and evolution of these organisms. 312 These studies are revealing totally unexpected levels of diversity among microbes. 313 ​314

A particularly important result in studies of the evolution of microbes was the discovery of horizontal gene transfer in 1959 in Japan . 315 This transfer of genetic material between different species of bacteria has played an important role in the spread of antibiotic resistance . 316 More recently, as understanding of genomes has expanded, it has been suggested that the horizontal transfer of genetic material has played an important role in the evolution of all organisms. 317 These high levels of horizontal gene transfer have led to the questioning of the family tree of organisms. 1920 Indeed, as part of the endosymbiotic theory of the origin of organelles , horizontal gene transfer was a critical step in the evolution of eukaryotes such as fungi, plants, and animals. 31844 _

Endosymbiosis and the origin of eukaryotic cells
Main article: Eukaryogenesis
See also: Symbiogenesis
The evolution of the earliest eukaryotes from the prokaryotic antecedent condition has received considerable attention from scientists. 319 This key event in the history of life occurred around 2 to 1.4 billion years ago during the early Proterozoic . Two mutually non-exclusive hypotheses have been put forward to explain the origin of eukaryotes: endosymbiosis and autogenesis. The hypothesis (also called the theory) of endosymbiosis indicates that the evolution of the first eukaryotic cells is the result of the permanent incorporation of what were once physiologically different and autonomous prokaryotic cells, within an archaea .as a host cell. According to this concept, mitochondria have evolved from some form of ancient aerobic proteobacteria , while chloroplasts evolved from some form of cyanobacteria -like prokaryote .

The explanation of these symbiogenetic processes would follow these steps: initially, an individual would come into contact with a bacterium, at the beginning that relationship could be parasitic, but over time both individuals could reach a mutualistic relationship, the host would find advantages in the characteristics and specialties of the host. If this point is not reached, natural selection would penalize this relationship, gradually reducing the number of these individuals in the population as a whole; on the contrary, a fruitful relationship would be favored by natural selection and the individuals involved would proliferate. Finally, the close relationship of both would be reflected in the genetic inheritance of the resulting individual; this individual would carry part or all of the two original genomes.320321 In contrast, the autogenic hypothesis holds that mitochondria and chloroplasts—as well as other eukaryotic organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum—developed as a consequence of selection pressures for physiological specialization within an ancient prokaryotic cell. According to this hypothesis, the host cell membrane would have invaginated to encapsulate physiologically different portions of the ancestral cell. Over time, these membrane-bound regions became increasingly specialized structures to form the different organelles that currently define the eukaryotic cell. 322However, numerous facts, such as the membrane structure, type of reproduction, DNA sequence, and antibiotic susceptibility of chloroplasts and mitochondria tend to support the symbiogenetic hypothesis. 323

Variations in the expression of genes involved in heredity
There are also forms of hereditary variation that are not based on changes in genetic information; but yes in the process of decoding it. The process that produces these variations leaves the genetic information intact and is often reversible. This process is called epigenetic inheritance that results from the transmission of non-DNA information sequences through meiosis or mitosis ; and may include phenomena such as DNA methylation or structural inheritance. Whether these mechanisms allow for the production of specific beneficial variations in response to environmental cues remains to be investigated. If this is the case, some instances of evolution could occur outside the typical Darwinian box, which would prevent any connection between environmental signals and the production of hereditary variations; although remembering that indirectly the origin of the process itself, if genes would be involved, such as the genes of the enzyme DNA-methyltransferase , histones , etc.

Experiments and studies on the evolutionary process
Main article: Experimental biological evolution
Direct observation of the evolutionary process in bacteria
In this regard, Richard Lenski , Professor at Michigan State University, has been carrying out an experiment on evolution using bacteria since 1989 ; due to the rapid reproduction of these microorganisms. In 1989, Lenski took a vial containing a strain of Escherichia coli from a -80  °C freezer.; with the aim of observing if there was any difference between the original strain and its descendants. In the experiment, subcultures were established, which are always grown under the same conditions, and from which every 75 days a sample is taken from each of them and frozen; proceeding in the same way for subcultures of these subcultures. About 500 generations have elapsed every 75 days since the start of the experiment, so it is now more than 40,000 generations since the original strain.

After 10,000 generations, bacteria already showed quite a few differences from their ancestor. The evolved bacteria when compared to the original strain were now larger and divided much more rapidly in DM medium (culture medium used for the experiment). The most important "evolutionary change" observed so far was that one of the subcultures in generation 31,500 of E. Coli (which are citrate negative) began to metabolize citrate , thus making much better use of the DM medium and therefore they can grow more in this medium. Thus, the E. colifrom that subculture evolved into Citrate-positive mutants. Another important evolutionary change is that a subculture, after 20,000 generations, underwent a change in its mutation rate , causing these mutations to increase and accumulate in its genome ( hypermutable phenotype ). Growing in a constant environment, most of the new mutations were neutral in nature (neutral mutations), but an increase in beneficial mutations was also beginning to be noted in the offspring of this subculture. 324

Lenski's results led to the establishment of other similar experiments but with different conditions: temperature, other carbon sources, presence of antibiotics; or with different microorganisms: Pseudomonas fluorescens, Myxococcus xanthus , and even yeasts; and similar results were found in all of them. Microorganisms changed, evolved and adapted to culture conditions.

Computer simulation of the process of biological evolution
With few exceptions, biological evolution is too slow a process to be observed directly. For this, disciplines such as paleontology , evolutionary biology or phylogeny are used , among other areas, for the observation and indirect study of evolution. For this reason, in 1990 the ecologist Thomas Ray faced the problem from another angle; Aware that it was impossible to observe the most complex evolutionary changes in living organisms in a short period of time, he decided to create a computer tool capable of simulating it. This computer program is called Earth .

Earth is a computer simulation of biological evolution. The idea is simple: create digital organisms that live in a digital environment with digital resources. Organisms are programs to which the main characteristic of living organisms is conferred: to use the resources available in their environment with the aim of reproducing. The environment would be the memory of the computer and the resources to proliferate the time in the processor. Therefore, these digital organisms will compete for space in the computer's memory and for time in the processor that enables them to replicate. 325

Impacts of the theory of evolution
Main article: Social implications of the theory of evolution

As Darwinism gained wide acceptance in the 1870s, caricatures of Charles Darwin in an ape or monkey body were made as a form of ad hominem argument to discredit the theory of evolution. 326
In the 19th century , especially after the publication of The Origin of Species , the idea that life had evolved was a subject of intense academic debate focused on the philosophical, social, and religious implications of evolution. Today, the fact that organisms evolve is undisputed in the scientific literature, and the modern evolutionary synthesis is widely accepted among scientists. 2 However, evolution remains a controversial concept by some religious groups. 327

While many religions and religious groups have reconciled their beliefs with evolution through various concepts of theistic evolution , there are many creationists who believe that evolution contradicts the creation myth in their religion . 328329330 As recognized by Darwin himself, the most controversial aspect of evolutionary biology is its implications for the origins of man . 80 In some countries ―notoriously in the United States― This tension between science and religion has fueled the creation-evolution controversy, a continuing religious conflict centered on politics and public education. 331 While other fields of science such as cosmology , 332 and Earth sciences 333 are also contradicted by literal interpretations of many religious texts, evolutionary biology is met with significantly more opposition from many religious believers.

Evolution has been used to support philosophical positions that promote discrimination and racism . For example, Francis Galton 's eugenic ideas were developed to argue that the human gene pool should be improved through breeding policies , including incentives for those considered to have "good" genes to reproduce, and forced sterilization, prenatal tests, contraception and even the elimination of people considered to have "bad" genes. 334 Another example of an extension of the theory of evolution that is currently considered unfounded is social Darwinism , a term referring to theMalthusian theory of the Whig party, developed by Herbert Spencer in such advertising phrases as " survival of the fittest " and other claims that social inequality , racism , and imperialism are justified by evolutionary theory. However, contemporary scientists and philosophers consider that these ideas are neither implicit in evolutionary theory nor supported by available data. 335 ​336 ​337

As the understanding of evolutionary phenomena has been developing, certain well-rooted positions and beliefs have been revised, violated or at least questioned. The appearance of evolutionary theory marked a milestone, not only in its field of relevance, by explaining the processes that originate the diversity of the living world; but also beyond the realm of biological sciences. Naturally, this biological concept collides with the traditional creationist and fixist explanations of some religious and mystical positions and, in fact, aspects such as descent from a common ancestor still provoke reactions in some people. 59The most important impact of evolutionary theory is at the level of the history of modern thought and its relationship with society . This profound impact is ultimately due to the non - teleological nature of evolutionary mechanisms: evolution does not follow an end or goal. Structures and species do not "appear" by necessity or by divine design, but from the variety of existing forms, only the most adapted are preserved over time. 338This "blind" mechanism, independent of a plan, a divine will or a supernatural force, has consequently been explored in other branches of knowledge. The adoption of the evolutionary perspective to address problems in other fields has been enriching and very current; however, in the process there have also been abuses ―attributing a biological value to cultural and cognitive differences― or distortions of it ―as a justification for eugenic positions― which have been used as « Argumentum ad consequentiam » throughout history of objections to the theory of evolution . 339

Evolution and religion
Main articles: Creationism , Intelligent design , and Theistic evolution .
Before geology became a science at the beginning of the 19th century , both Western religions and scientists dogmatically and almost unanimously discounted or condemned any proposal that implied that life is the result of an evolutionary process. However, as geological evidence began to accumulate around the world, a group of scientists began to question whether a literal interpretation of the creation recounted in the Judeo-Christian Bible could be reconciled with their findings (and their implications). Some religious geologists , such as Dean William Auckland in England, Edward Hitchcockin the United States and Hugo Millar in Scotland continued to justify the geological and fossil evidence only in terms of a universal Flood ; but once Charles Darwin published his Origin of Species in 1859 , scientific opinion began to move rapidly away from the literal interpretation of the Bible. This early debate about the literal validity of the Bible did not take place behind closed doors, and it unsettled educational opinion on both continents. Eventually, he instigated a counter -reformation that took the form of a religious revival on both continents between 1857and 1860 . 340

In countries or regions where the majority of the population holds strong religious beliefs, creationism has much greater appeal than in countries where the majority of the people hold secular beliefs . From the 1920s to the present in the United States, various religious attacks on the teaching of evolutionary theory have occurred, particularly by evangelical fundamentalist Christians or Pentecostals . Despite the overwhelming evidence supporting the theory of evolution, 341 some groups interpret the Bible as a divine beinghe directly created human beings, and each of the other species, as separate and finished species. This view is commonly called creationism , and continues to be advocated by some religious fundamentalist groups, particularly American Protestants ; primarily through a form of creationism called intelligent design. The religious-creationist "lobbies" want to exclude the teaching of biological evolution from public education in that country; Although it is currently a rather local phenomenon, since science-based education is mandatory within the curricula, surveys reveal a great sensitivity of the American public to this message, which has no equivalent anywhere else in the world. One of the best-known episodes of this confrontation occurred in late 2005 in Kansas, where the Kansas State Board of Education decided to allow creationist doctrines to be taught as an alternative to scientific theory of evolution.342 After this decision there was a strong citizen response, which had one of its best-known consequences in the creation of a parody of religion, Pastafarianism , an invention of Bobby Henderson , a graduate in Physics from Oregon State University , to demonstrate ironically, it is wrong and wrong to teach intelligent design as a scientific theory. The Kansas State Board of Education subsequently reversed its decision in August 2006 . 343 This educational conflict has also affected other countries; for example, in 2005 in Italythere was an attempt to suspend the teaching of the theory of evolution. 344 ​345

In response to the scientific acceptance of the theory of evolution, many religionists and philosophers have tried to unify the scientific and religious points of view, either formally or informally; through a "pro-evolution creationism." Thus, for example, some religionists have adopted a creationist approach since theistic evolution or evolutionary creationism , and defend that God provides a divine spark that initiates the process of evolution, and (or) where God created the course of evolution.

Starting in 1950 , the Catholic Church took a neutral position regarding evolution with Pope Pius XII 's encyclical Humani generis . 346 It distinguishes between the soul, as it was created by God, and the physical body, whose development can be the subject of an empirical study:

...the Magisterium of the Church does not prohibit that ―according to the current state of the sciences and theology― in the investigations and disputes, between the most competent men of both fields, the doctrine of evolutionism is the object of study, as far as it seeks the origin of the human body in a pre-existing living matter – but the Catholic faith commands to defend that souls are created immediately by God. But all of this must be done in such a way that the reasons for one or the other opinion — that is, the one that defends and the one that opposes evolutionism — are seriously, moderately and temperately examined and judged; and as long as all are willing to submit to the judgment of the Church, to whom Christ conferred the task of authentically interpreting the Holy Scriptures and defending the dogmas of the faith. 347

On the other hand, the encyclical neither endorses nor rejects the general belief in evolution because the evidence at the time was considered unconvincing. It allows, however, the possibility of accepting it in the future:

Not a few insistently pray that the Catholic faith take such sciences very seriously; and this is certainly worthy of praise, provided that they are really proven facts; but it is necessary to be very cautious when it is rather a matter of hypotheses, which, even supported by human science, rub against the doctrine contained in Sacred Scripture or in tradition. 348

In 1996, John Paul II stated that "the theory of evolution is more than a hypothesis" and recalled that "The Magisterium of the Church is directly interested in the question of evolution, because it influences the conception of man." 349 Pope Benedict XVI has stated that "there is much scientific evidence in favor of evolution, which is presented as a reality that we must see and that enriches our knowledge of life and of being as such. But the doctrine of evolution does not answer all the questions and above all it does not answer the great philosophical question: where does all this come from and how does everything take a path that finally ends in man? 350

Muslim reaction to the theory of evolution was extremely varied, from those who believed in a literal interpretation of creation according to the Qur'an , to that of many educated Muslims who subscribed to a theistic or guided version of evolution, in which the Qur'an it reinforced rather than contradicted science. This latter reaction was favored because Al-Jahiz , a 9th-century Muslim scholar , had proposed a concept similar to that of natural selection. [351] However, acceptance of evolution remains low in the Muslim world as prominent figures reject evolutionary theory as a denial of God and as unreliable in explaining the origin of human beings.351 Other objections from Muslim scholars and writers largely mirror those raised in the Western world. 352

Regardless of their acceptance by mainstream religious hierarchies, the same initial objections to Darwin's theory continue to be used against current evolutionary theory. The ideas that species change over time through natural processes and that different species share their ancestors seem to contradict the Genesis account of Creation. Believers in biblical inerrancy attacked Darwinism as heresy. Natural theology of the nineteenth century was marked by the analogy of the watchmaker of William Paley, a design argument still used by the creationist movement. When Darwin's theory was published, ideas of theistic evolution were presented in such a way as to indicate that evolution is a secondary cause open to scientific investigation, while maintaining the belief in God as the first cause, with an unspecified role. in the orientation of evolution and in the creation of human beings. 353

Other theories of evolution and scientific criticism of the synthetic theory
Main article: History of objections and criticisms to the theory of evolution
Richard Dawkins , in his 1976 work The Selfish Gene , made the following claim:

Today the theory of evolution is as subject to doubt as the theory that the Earth revolves around the Sun. 354

Biological evolution is an accepted fact since the eighteenth century , the theory that explains it has tried to be scientifically debated. The current theory that explains biological evolution, called modern evolutionary synthesis theory (or simply synthetic theory), is the model currently accepted by the scientific community to describe evolutionary phenomena; and although there is no solid alternative theory developed today, some scientists [ who? ] have called for the need to reform, expand or replace the synthetic theory, with new models capable of integrating, for example , developmental biologyor incorporate within current theory a series of biological discoveries whose evolutionary role is being debated; such as certain epigenetic hereditary mechanisms , horizontal gene transfer , or proposals such as the existence of multiple hierarchical levels of selection or the plausibility of genomic assimilation phenomena to explain macroevolutionary processes.

The most criticized and debated aspects of the theory of modern evolutionary synthesis are: gradualism , which has been answered by the punctuated equilibrium model of Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould ; 356 the preponderance of natural selection over purely stochastic motives ; the behavioral explanation of altruism and genetic reductionism that would avoid holistic implications and emergent properties to any complex biological system. 357 Despite what has been indicated, however, it must be considered that the current scientific consensusit is that the theory itself (in its foundations) has not been refuted in the field of evolutionary biology, being only perfected; and for this reason it is still considered the "cornerstone of modern biology". 358 ​359

Other minority hypotheses
Main article: Symbiogenetic theory
Among other minority hypotheses, that of the American biologist Lynn Margulis stands out , who considered that in the same way that eukaryotic cells arose through the symbiogenetic interaction of several prokaryotic cells, many other characteristics of organisms and the phenomenon of speciation would be the consequence. of similar symbiogenetic interactions. In his work Capturing Genomes. A theory about the origin of speciesMargulis argued that symbiogenesis would be the main force in evolution. According to her theory, the random acquisition and accumulation of mutations would not be enough to explain how hereditary variations are produced, but she postulated that organelles, organisms and species would arise as the result of symbiogenesis. 321 While the modern evolutionary synthesis emphasizes "competition" as the main force behind evolution, Margulis posited cooperation as the engine of evolutionary change. 360He argues that bacteria, along with other microorganisms, helped create the conditions that are required for life, such as oxygen. Margulis argued that these microorganisms would constitute an important component of the biomass of the Earth and that they would constitute the main reason why the current conditions are maintained. He also stated that bacteria are capable of exchanging genes more quickly and easily than eukaryotes, and because of this, they are more versatile, so they would be the architects of the complexity of living beings. 321

Likewise, Máximo Sandín , on the other hand, vehemently rejected any of the versions of Darwinism present in current theory and proposed an alternative hypothesis to explain the fact of evolution. In the first place, it appraises the work of Lamarck , reviewing the hypotheses or predictions (known as Lamarckism ) that were made by this biologist; and that currently, according to Sandín, would be corroborated by the facts. 361362 For example, Sandín formulated his hypothesis based on the fact that environmental circumstances can condition, not only the expression of genetic information ( epigenetic phenomena , control of alternative splicing, genomic stress…), but the dynamics of the embryonic development process, 363 ​364 ​365 ​366​ and postulates that the fundamental foundation of ecosystems is balance and not competition. 367368 In accordance with his ideas, he postulates that the tendency of organic forms to greater complexity can be appreciated, 369370 and this would be due to the existence of "laws" (that is, not "random" ) that govern the variability of organisms; 371 ​372​ and that the capacity for these changes are, in some way, inscribed in organisms. 373374 Taking into account that 98.5% of the human genome, for example, is made up of repeated sequences with a regulatory function as well as a considerable amount of endogenous viruses ; and from this, Sandín proposes in his hypothesis that this conformation of the genome cannot be the result of chance and natural selection . Also rejecting Dawkins' "selfish DNA" thesis, Sandín suggests that this would be produced by the pressure of the environment., which would cause certain viruses to be inserted into the genome or certain gene sequences to be modified and, as a consequence, completely new organisms would be generated; with substantial differences with respect to its predecessors. According to this theory, then, the fundamental mechanism of evolutionary change is neither natural selection nor random mutation ; but only the ability of viruses to integrate (into existing genomes (by horizontal transfer of their genes). In addition, Sandín points out that the environment, and not random mutations, would cause certain groups of living beings to assume new characteristics, the which, on the other hand, would not be gradual changes but abrupt changes, in specific episodes and without intermediate phases .355 According to Abdalla, the hypothesis supported by Sandín would be based on a large amount of scientific data and would open a new area of ​​research in the field of biology. 355