Carpenter bees are an annual spring nuisance throughout
Kansas. There are several native species, but the most common is Xylocopa virginica (Linnaeus). This is also the most
common species in the eastern 2/3 of the United States.
Carpenter bees are often confused with bumblebees, but
there are some relatively easy ways to distinguish them.
Bumblebees, even in flight, appear much hairier because
their entire bodies are covered in dense, yellow hair.
Carpenter bees have a hairy thorax, (middle part of body)
but a mostly bare abdomen, causing them to appear shiny
(Figure 1). Both carpenter bees and bumblebees are large
insects, but bumblebees are generally a little larger
(5/16 to 11/8 inch) than carpenter bees (3/4 to 7/8 inch).
Male carpenter bees are easily distinguished from females
because they have a whitish or golden (some describe it as
bald) face. Females have a dark or black shiny face (Figures
2 and 3). The distinction is important because females can
sting, while males cannot.
Biology
The name carpenter bee comes from the wood-boring
behavior of the adults. They have large mandibles (jaws),
which are used to excavate tunnels and cells through soft
and weathered wood. They do not eat wood, but instead
forage on pollen and nectar, like other bees. This behavior
may contribute to localized pollination if significant numbers of bees are nesting in the area, but because carpenter
bees are solitary, large populations are present only where
an abundance of suitable nesting sites exist.
Carpenter bees in Kansas are univoltine, which means
there is only one generation per year. A new generation is
initiated in late May or early June with the emergence of
both male and female adults. Males generally exit the nest
first and hover in the area, anxiously awaiting the emergence of the females. They become very territorial during
this waiting period, and sometimes “dive bomb” intruders
to scare away competitors and potential threats to the nesting site. However, these males are harmless and unable to
sting. After the females emerge, the males chase after them
to mate, and die soon afterward.
After mating, females begin to construct nests by refurbishing old nest sites or excavating new sites. Carpenter
bees’ nests are relatively large, like the bees themselves.
Excavation proceeds slowly, at the rate of about one inch
per week in old, soft woods. The females chew through
the wood, leaving ½ inch diameter tunnels that are smooth
on the inside (Figure 4). They can chew through wood at
right angles to the grain, but usually excavate the brood
cells along the grain of the wood.
Carpenter Bees
S t r u c t u r a l P e s t s
Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment Station and Cooperative Extension Service
Figure 1: Carpenter bee vs. bumblebee
Figure 2: Female carpenter bee Figure 3: Male carpenter bee Figure 4: Carpenter bee tunnel entrance
Management
Prevention is
the best tactic to
manage carpenter bees. They
prefer old, soft,
untreated, and
unpainted wood.
Keep all exposed
wooden surfaces
well painted with
a polyurethane or
oil-based paint.
Carpenter bees
only bore into wood, so any non-wood material, such as
vinyl siding or aluminum, may be used as a wood substitute
or replacement to prevent attacks.
Structures already infested with bees should have all
entrance holes thoroughly treated with insecticide, either a
dust formulation or liquid. Bees will excavate through the
paint to get to the outside and reuse the gallery, so painting will not eradicate an existing infestation. If possible,
treat individual holes and plug with caulking. Plugging
with caulking alone, without insecticide treatment, may be
sufficient to control current infestations since the bees do
not seem able to chew through caulking. But treating the
surfaces around the holes should also be done because bees
will seek new sites to excavate, and a residual insecticide
may control females that are not using existing holes.
Begin insecticide treatment as soon as bees are noticed in
the spring or when adults emerge in late summer. Treating at night results in the most effective control and avoids
disturbing the bees.
Brand names appearing in this publication are for product identification purposes only.
No endorsement is intended, nor is criticism implied of similar products not mentioned.
Publications from Kansas State University are available at www.bookstore.ksre.ksu.edu
Contents of this publication may be freely reproduced for educational purposes. All other rights reserved. In each case, credit
R. Jeff Whitworth, Ph.D., Associate Professor, and Holly Davis, Insect Diagnostician, Department of Entomology, Carpenter Bees,
Kansas State University, February 2011.
Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment Station and Cooperative Extension Service
MF-2946 February 2011
K-State Research and Extension is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension Work,
Acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, as amended. Kansas State University, County Extension Councils, Extension Districts, and United States
Department of Agriculture Cooperating, Gary M. Pierzynski, Interim Director.
R. Jeff Whitworth, Entomologist
 Holly Davis, Research Associate
They create a main tunnel with entrances and exits, and
several brood cells extending off the main tunnel. There
may be six to 12 individual brood cells constructed by each
female. Each cell will then be supplied with food collected
by the female. Pollen and nectar are mixed together in the
female’s gut and regurgitated into each brood cell. She then
deposits one egg in each cell with this food and seals off
individual cells with chewed wood.
All this activity, nest construction and food gathering is
energy intensive. Most females complete their life cycle by
July and die soon after laying eggs.
The larvae consume the food supplied by the female, pupate,
and become adults in August. They will occasionally chew
through the plug to seek pollen and nectar but mainly hang
out in their gallery, where they also spend the winter. In May
and June they start the process all over again.
Damage
Carpenter bees cause more concern than actual damage,
especially to structural wood. Males’ territorial behavior,
mainly loud buzzing and “dive bombing” intruders, is
a nuisance, but they are harmless. Females only sting if
handled.
The females’ large holes, often stained yellow or brown
with piles of coarse sawdust beneath, can be unsightly and
reduce aesthetic value of a wooden structure (Figure 5).
However, carpenter bees seem to prefer refurbishing
existing sites rather than creating new ones. Thus, tunnels
which have been repeatedly utilized by many carpenter
bees for multiple years may be up to 10 feet long with
many brood cells extending off the main gallery. This
repeated excavation of the same site for several years may
result in structural damage.
Figure 5: Carpenter bee tunnel entrance with
sawdust and pollen trail