What is carpentry? 
carpentry 
Carpentry The work of artisans dealing with woodworking. The artisan who deals with woodworking and makes various items from wood is called a "carpenter" and this art is called "carpentry". Carpentry takes names such as furniture maker, joiner, carpenter, modeler, woodturner, carter, cooper, according to the branches in which it is divided. Furniture making is also called "fine carpentry" among the people. Furniture of all places such as living room, bedroom, dining room, living room, hall, entrance is made by furniture makers. people's 

Turkish
The English
Other
Carpentry (Turkish) English
1. n. carpentry
2.joinery
3. woodwork
Information about carpentry
Carpentry The work of artisans dealing with woodworking. The artisan who deals with woodworking and makes various items from wood is called a "carpenter" and this art is called "carpentry". Carpentry takes names such as furniture maker, joiner, carpenter, modeler, woodturner, carter, cooper, according to the branches in which it is divided. Furniture making is also called "fine carpentry" among the people. Furniture of all places such as living room, bedroom, dining room, living room, hall, entrance is made by furniture makers. Works such as joinery, door, window, shutter, paneling, which are called "rough carpenter" among the people; carpenter, in building construction, woodworking of the building such as roof, ceiling, floor and stairs; The modeler makes softwood models of the handle, handle, various machine and engine parts to be cast. The woodturner puts various pieces of furniture such as legs or registers, stair handrails, and crown ornaments through the wood lathe.

Carpentry was previously learned by working as an apprentice with a master. Although art is learned in this way in our time, it is mostly taught in Industrial Vocational High Schools opened on woodworking. In these schools, there are lessons that teach the details and techniques of the carpentry profession. Whether trained from apprenticeships or art schools, there are some basics a carpenter should know. The first of these is "material knowledge". It is learned from the school or the master that which type of tree will be used for which jobs. The second is “tool knowledge”. It is only possible to learn what the nearly 100 tools in the carpenter's sets called Avadan can do by seeing, working or apprenticeship at school.

The real mastery of this profession lies in the proper use of these tools. It is a knowledge learned through long experience what each of the tools does and which tool to use according to the material used. The third essential information to be known in carpentry is the history of carpentry, furniture and construction works. This knowledge helps a master carpenter do more beautiful work.

Dealing with carpentry work as an amateur is very useful in terms of making use of free time. A lot of work can be done at home with some tools. As these works are very enjoyable, many small carpentry works that the house needs are done in this way. The furniture made by Sultan Abdulhamid II, one of the Ottoman Sultans, is a masterpiece.

In order to be resistant to knocks and bumps, the workbenches used in carpentry should be made of durable woods such as hornbeam and ash. A normal carpenter's workbench is 180 cm wide, 65 cm high, and 80-90 cm high. There are also benches where these measurements are made by changing. The main parts of the bench; table made of thick wood, clamping (vice) arrangement on the right and left side of the workbench, space behind the table (tool rack, drawer and feet).

Benches according to the change made in the front clamp; It is divided into two as German and French type bench. The only difference between these two types of workbenches is the front clamping (it is in the vise tool, other parts are the same. There are also benches made by placing a rear vice (clamping) on ​​each corner of a square table to save space. These are called "four carpenter workbenches". In these workbenches ; in the middle there is a tool (tools) space, four drawers and the legs on which the table sits.As in the double benches, the quadruple bench also has holes for attaching the bench iron on the table.

The names of the main carpentry tools are: grater, saw, pliers, miter, sharpening stone, auger, file, mallet, hammer, screwdriver, drill, vise, compasses, etc.

With the development of technology, electrical machines have also started to be used in carpentry, many works done with hand tools are planer drill, saw, thickness, press, etc. It has become possible to be made in electric carpentry workbenches such as

Source: Directory Encyclopedia

 

Related Topics All
Joiner 
Joinery 
woodwork 
cabinetmaking 
Carpenter 
carpentry 
About 
correctional facility 
Islahhane is the name given to the art schools established in the Ottoman Empire. Since it was thought that the orphaned and needy children would be taken to the school opened in the Danube province and the situation and future of them would be improved, this expression, which means reformatory, was used.

Casein 
A proteinaceous substance from the "phosphoprotein" group, which forms the basis of nitrogenous substances in the milk of mammals. Casein, along with skim milk powder, is one of the by-products of fat making. Types of casein are: Yeast casein, lactic casein.

Craft 
Craft is based on skilled labor rather than capital; profession that requires dexterity and mastery as well as education. The connoisseurs of these professions are called craftsmen.

Profession 
Occupation is the name of the title that people earn at the end of a process that usually requires intensive education and work in order to survive.

Contract
Contract manufacturing, or simply Contract, is the result of the relationship between two companies, one of which has an economic advantage over the other, as a result of the small company making continuous production in the type, quantity and quality agreed for the big company and delivering this production on the agreed date.

Pencil 
Pencil is a pencil used for writing or drawing on paper, the writing part of which is mostly made of clay and graphite. In a typical pencil, the graphite is covered with wood. In addition, pencils with metal or plastic housing are also available.

Carpenter
Carpentry is the craft of woodworking. It is the work of revealing the objects by taking the tree in its natural state or as processed by machines and passing it through processes such as cutting, mowing, sanding.