  By Steve Buchman The Bee Works  Along with  bumble bee queens, carpenter bees (genus Xylocopa )  are the largest native bees in the United States. There are numerous  species of carpenter bees that inhabit a broad range of ecosystems from  tropical to subtropical to temperate. In the United   States carpenters bees can be found across the southern United States from Arizona  to Florida and in the eastern United States, north to New York.  These gentle giants get their name from  their life history habits of excavating precisely rounded galleries inside  wood. Using their broad, strong mandibles (jaws), they chew into dead but  non-decayed limbs or trunks of standing dead trees. Some species, like the  eastern Xylocopa virginica, occasionally  take up residence in fence posts or structural timbers, especially redwood, and  become a minor nuisance. Inside their rounded branched galleries, they form  pollen/nectar loaves upon which they lay their giant eggs (up to 15 mm long). The  female forms partitions between each egg cell by mixing sawdust and her saliva  together. These partition walls are very similar to particle board!    In this image, the carpenter bee is visible in a cell. Photo courtesy Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, Bugwood Network .    Note the complex gallery of cells in these pieces of wood excavated by carpenter bees. Note the pollen-nectar loaves in several of the cells and the partition walls separating adjacent cells. Photo by Stephen Buchmann.    Carpenter bees are long lived, up to  three years and there can be one or two generations per year. Often newly  hatched daughters, live together in their nest with their mother. Biologists  using observation nests or X-ray imaging techniques have observed returning  foragers feeding other nest mates. These observations have led some  entomologists to consider carpenter bees primitively social. However, unlike  honey bees and bumble bees there are no queen or worker castes, only individual  males and females.   A carpenter bee pollinating flowers of aromatic sumac ( Rhus aromatica ). Photo by Jerry Payne, Bugwood Network .  The smallest and the largest: a Perdita minima on a female carpenter bee's head. Photo by Stephen Buchmann.   In our vegetable and flower gardens,  carpenter bees are generalists and may be found foraging on a number of  different species. They, like bumblebees are early morning foragers. Carpenter  bees land on flower blossoms they become living tuning forks. Using their  powerful thoracic muscles carpenter bees sonicate the dry pollen grains out of  the flowers anthers. This type of pollen gathering is called buzz  pollination. Carpenter bees are excellent pollinators of eggplant, tomato and  other vegetables and flowers.  From time to time carpenter bees are  quite ingenious in their foraging for nectar. On flowers such as salvias,  penstemons, and other long, tubular flowers the carpenter bee, due to its large  size, is unable to enter the flower opening. Instead they become nectar  robbers. Using their mouthparts they cut a slit at the base of corolla and  steal away with the nectar without having pollinated the flower.  A widespread western US  species, Xylocopa varipuncta , has an  unusual mating system. Its green-eyed golden males (the females are all black)  have huge perfume glands in their thoraces. Territorial males take up positions  in non-flowering plants near other males. As a group (lek) they actively  release their rose-scented blend of chemicals. Females are attracted from  downwind and choose a male with which to mate.        