What is Altitude Sickness? Symptoms, Causes and Prevention Health Tips What is Altitude Sickness? Symptoms, Causes and Prevention Summary 1 What is altitude sickness? 2 Symptoms of altitude sickness 3 Causes of altitude sickness 4 Prevention and care What is altitude sickness? Altitude sickness or acute mountain sickness is a syndrome of suffering, linked to a too rapid rise in high altitudes, to the lack of acclimatization and personal sensitivity, more or less important. The symptoms of altitude sickness are headaches, nausea and vomiting, insomnia, general tiredness, lassitude, dizziness, balance disorders, dyspnea and loss of appetite. Symptoms of altitude sickness There are five manifestations of altitude sickness: Acute altitude sickness correlates with altitude and speed of ascent. The initial symptoms are: headache, the most common and persistent symptom, weakness, dizziness, chills, nausea, vomiting, pale face, shortness of breath and purple lips (cyanosis). Next: facial flushing, irritability, difficulty concentrating, vertigo, ringing in the ears, hearing disturbances, loss of appetite, insomnia, increased shortness of breath, severe weakness, exertion intolerance, increased headache, palpitations, mood disturbances. respiratory rate and weight loss. More serious symptoms include pulmonary edema and encephalopathy. Pulmonary edema: Its symptoms are cough, shortness of breath disproportionate to exercise, headache, poor ability to exercise, fatigue, shortness of breath at rest, and chest tightness. Recognition of these symptoms as symptoms of pulmonary edema is vital so that the patient can descend before the disease prevents it. If it does not descend, the following symptoms are: great respiratory distress with the subjective and objective sensation of wheezing (respiratory whistles), and worsening of breathing on stretching and improvement when raising the chest (orthopnea). High altitude encephalopathy alarm. The symptoms are: altered consciousness and gait, the patient walks as if he were drunk. If the patient does not descend, there is usually a severe headache, confusion, urinary retention or incontinence, neurologic deficits, seizures, and coma. Subacute mountain sickness occurs in unacclimatized people who stay at altitudes above 4,500 m. Symptoms are shortness of breath and cough. There is also usually dehydration, dry skin and itching. Chronic mountain sickness is not usually a traveler's disease but rather a disease typical of residents of communities living at high altitudes who have lost the mechanisms of adaptation to the surrounding environment. It is therefore a common disease that affects people in good health but exposed to an extreme environment of high altitude. Its incidence is variable, but increases very rapidly with altitude; It will be 15% at 2,000 meters of altitude and 60% at 4,000 meters. This malady appears after a few hours at altitude; it recedes with acclimatization and disappears immediately on descent. People who take a cable car to stay only one or two hours at high altitude, the time to admire the scenery would not be affected. INFORMATION FOR A HEALTHY LIFE Don't miss out on any of our content. We send you a weekly email with all the news from the blog. YES, SIGN ME UP: I'M INTERESTED IN THIS INFORMATION FOR A HEALTHY LIFE Don't miss out on any of our content. We send you a weekly email with all the news from the blog. I'M IN! Causes of altitude sickness Atmospheric pressure and therefore with it, the partial pressure of oxygen, decrease with altitude according to a practically exponential relationship. This is why the amount of oxygen available at the cellular level decreases, which immediately generates a certain number of compensatory mechanisms (hyperventilation, modification of the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen, polyglobulia, etc.). When these compensatory mechanisms are insufficient or there is not enough time to settle in, the victim can develop a set of symptoms called acute mountain sickness. In the most severe cases, the person can develop pulmonary edema, brain edema, which can ultimately lead to death in the absence of appropriate treatment (lowering, oxygen, pharmacology). Prevention and care Prevention starts with acclimatization. It includes slow ascent, rest and adequate sleep the day before the ascent, eating with measure and avoiding alcohol, tobacco and unnecessary physical activity. For prolonged stays above 3,500 meters, it is necessary to progress in altitude from 500 meters to 800 meters maximum per day depending on the sensitivity. At a high altitude (between 4,000 meters and 5,000 meters), high altitude pulmonary edema (Ophain) can brutally occur at any time during the first 48 hours. Acclimatization is impossible or suboptimal from 5,500 m. Some medications, such as calcium inhibitors, improve the patient's condition and, in the event of illness, give him a small margin of time to allow him to rapidly descend and lose altitude, which is really the only effective method of cure. At very high altitudes, beyond 5,000 meters, the illness can be complicated by high-altitude cerebral edema characterized by mood and behavior changes and/or unbearable headaches. Disturbed eyesight and vomiting in jet planes precede coma, which is fatal, if the patient has not immediately dropped to a lower altitude, or is immediately placed in a hood allowing the pressure to build up, called a hyperbaric hood. In the Andes (Peru, Bolivia), the properties of the coca leaf, consumed in the form of tea (coca tea) or chewed, allow to calm the symptoms.