Fear of heights: why are people afraid?
Article content [ hide ]

1 What is acrophobia?
2 Causes of illness
3 Symptoms of the disease
4 Diagnosing the problem
5 Treatment for acrophobia
A person is part of a vast world that is fraught with many interesting things. Every day something new and interesting happens, but for many, these events remain just a part of someone's life. The reason for this is the fear of heights or acrophobia. A person suffering from this form of psychological deviation cannot simply say to himself “I am not afraid of heights”, since the panic signal entering the brain overrides all others.

What is acrophobia?
Acrophobia

Acrophobia is a state of psychological stress, panic, often uncontrollable, occurring in individuals when climbing to a certain height. It is important to understand that fear of heights and acrophobia are different conditions. The first state is based on subconscious caution, the desire to preserve one's health and life, the second is a form of psychological disorder that requires the help of a specialist.

Such a phobia as fear of heights has been known since ancient times. In most cases, it is not possible to overcome it on your own. This disease is most widespread in the modern world, where technology is developed, and you can move not only on the ground, but also in the air. In especially severe cases, people who suffer from acrophobia cannot afford to take the elevator or escalator. They cannot say: I am not afraid of heights and continue moving, because fear literally permeates them, despite the fact that there is no real danger. They also cannot explain the nature of their fears.

Causes of the disease
Fear of heights is a special condition that can manifest itself in each person in different ways. So some people are afraid to fly on airplanes or go out onto the balcony in a high-rise building, while others can't bear the very thought of some kind of elevation. Despite the development of psychology and knowledge of human nature, today there is no consensus on the causes of phobia. Some experts agree that the panic fear of heights is just an overprotective reaction, which is part of the "memory of the genes." However, it is easy to challenge this theory, because to protect yourself from falling it is enough to say to yourself: I am not afraid of heights, but panic will lead to the opposite result - the very fall that a person is so afraid of.

Another, no less common theory is that this phobia arises as a result of some negative experience associated with being at a height earlier:

Falls from a tree;
Fright in early childhood;
Developed imagination.
Most psychologists are of the opinion that the main cause of a phobia associated with height is the presence of somatic pathology. From a medical point of view, fear of heights may be associated with disorders of the vestibular apparatus.

Symptoms of the disease
In order to overcome acrophobia, you need to know the symptoms of the disease. There is a division of all signs into those that are of a psychological nature and somatic manifestations of a phobia. Fear can also be classified as mild, moderate, and panic. It depends on the severity of the disease.

Symptoms of a mild form of fear of heights:

Slight increase in heart rate and respiration;
Reluctance to get close to a source of danger, such as an open window.
Acrophobia

It is important to understand that such a condition cannot be called a disease. The usual phrase "I'm not afraid of heights" can help here.

The psychological symptoms of a phobia are expressed differently. Most often, people who have a fear of heights in the stage of acrophobia can observe:

Panic in an uncontrollable form;
Presence of excitement even in sleep;
Reluctance to climb to a certain height.
A person usually ceases to control his behavior, which is expressed in a refusal to go. Often he just sits down, taking a defense position - covers his face and head with his hands, as if hugging himself, trying to protect himself from the outside world. An important feature of behavior is that a person does not get in touch with someone who wants to help him, all the more so to confess and say: I am afraid of heights.

Symptoms of the problem:

Cardiopalmus;
Paleness of the skin;
Tremor of hands and/or legs;
sweating;
dilated pupils;
muscle hypertonicity.
Also, quite often, increased motor activity is noted - movements of the arms and legs in order to additionally protect oneself from impending disaster, even if it is present only in the human imagination.

Problem Diagnosis
Whether it is a simple fear of heights or a phobia requiring specialist attention, the diagnosis should be made by an experienced psychologist or, in special cases, a psychiatrist. Independent attempts to diagnose the form of the disease can only aggravate the situation. Diagnosis is based on oral or written stories of a person. Sometimes the psychologist asks you to draw your feelings at the moment of ascent to a height or explain them in one phrase. All inquiries should be carried out very carefully and correctly, since a person in this state is very sensitive and vulnerable.

Treatment of acrophobia
It is possible to overcome the fear of heights only under the strict guidance of a specialist, because the disease will recede on its own only if it has a mild form - the phrase “I am not afraid of heights” will become the best helper for a person. In the event that panic attacks and all the accompanying symptoms are observed, then the appointment of a psychologist will become mandatory.

It is important to remember that there are no medicines that allow you to completely get rid of a phobia of fear of heights. Commercially available drugs can only soften an attack or make a person fall asleep. The fear will disappear for a short period of time and then return, sometimes in a more vivid form, both emotionally and physiologically.

In the event that the disease has an advanced form, it is best to consult a psychologist or psychiatrist for a full treatment. This is necessary in order to use effective methods to relieve a person of stress - hypnosis, suggestion.

There is no specific prevention of acrophobia. It is recommended to avoid falls from a height. Those who already suffer from this disease are not recommended to climb tall buildings in order to prevent an attack.