PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF ALTITUDE SICKNESS OR PUNA 

Speleology Section (1) 

By Martin Abarrategui (2) 

In this work the author develops a topic of particular interest for the Force, given the location of some of the elements of its deployment. The contribution of scientific, historical and symptomatological antecedents of the ill investigated, together with the therapies in each case indicated for its treatment, suggest its reading and, if necessary, its application. 

    The behavior of the human organism at altitude, above 3,000 meters, has interested man since the dawn of our century.

    Regardless of pure physiological research, two human activities have given it the character of applied science in the world: national defense and sporting events. In the late 1940s, the latter, by providing international prestige, became part of national interests, and indirectly of national defense. 

    It is worth mentioning here that in 1959, when the conflict between India and China for the possession of Tibet reached its hottest point, a Hindu Infantry Brigade, abruptly transferred from sea level to 5,000 m, lost its operability , suffering slightly more than 60 percent "discharges" from altitude sickness (Indian Medical Research, Vol. 2, 1960).

    Our country has an important strategic mining reserve in areas of the Puna, whose exploitation can be optimized if "altitude sickness" is eradicated. The same can be said about industrial activity, and the very profitable emergence of skiing and other winter sports, which are necessarily practiced in high-altitude areas.

    "Altitude sickness" or "puna", as it will be called in this article, presents various symptoms that are transcribed in their entirety, without necessarily all of them appearing in the same individual and with the same intensity.

    These symptoms appear as an adaptive response of the most sensitive organs, such as the nervous system, kidneys, heart and lungs, to hypoxia (oxygen deficiency in the tissues). Its manifestations are: throbbing headache in temporal and occipital areas; decreased thought speed and reflexes; frequent nocturnal insomnia and daytime sleepiness, tachycardia, hypertension, hyperventilation and periodic breathing (Cheine Stokes), marked physical fatigue, nausea and eventually vomiting.

    For the purposes of this publication, we will only make here a brief summary of the physiological mechanisms responsible for the aforementioned symptoms.

    "At higher altitudes, the partial pressure of oxygen in atmospheric air decreases. This decrease stimulates the carotid corpuscle, resulting in hyperventilation and excessive loss of carbon dioxide (periodic Cheine Stokes respiration), which determines a state of organic gaseous alkalosis, causing all the symptoms of "puna" To neutralize the alkalosis, acetazolamide is administered, using its ability to lower the pH by inhibiting renal carbonic anhydrase, with a consecutive increase in the elimination of bicarbonate and retention of hydrogen ions."

Experience carried out in the National Gendarmerie 

    In the 1984 campaign, the Speleology Section of the Intelligence Directorate of the National Gendarmerie saw its actions severely limited, since above 3,700 m six of its eight members began to manifest symptoms of "altitude sickness", "soroche" or "puna".

    Seeking to broaden the panorama, a survey was begun among the Institution's personnel, concluding that approximately 70 percent of the members of the Force who are transferred from sea level to "puna" areas suffer from the symptoms of "bad height" for an average of three days.

    It can thus be inferred that the Chief of a 100-man Unit, which was renewed over the course of a year, would have lost 210 man-days of activity in his Unit.

    Likewise, from the information collected, it appears that patrols with a small number of components, apparently already adapted, fail in their mission, having one or two "sick leave" due to illness (puna), which forces them to return to their base.

    Lastly, and not least, there is real concern, which obviously undermines professional efficiency, in those members of the National Gendarmerie who move to puna areas with their families and observe the very annoying symptoms suffered by their spouses, children and other members of the family group.

	
Geological plan of the Llullaillaco Volcano (Prov of Salta) where the Expedition of the Speleology Section of the National Directorate of Gendarmerie was carried out.  

    The experience carried out in the Llullaillaco volcano, 6,739 meters high, in the Province of Salta, was based on the rapid transfer from sea level to 4,800 m, with 12 hours of rest at 3,700 m (San Antonio de los Cobres), of eleven men of different ages and physical conditions who were part of the Speleology Expedition of the National Directorate of Gendarmerie, and who had been studied clinically and biochemically before that.    

    The eleven members of the Expedition -six members of the Speleology Section of GN, an Officer of the general ranking and four members of the Argentine Center of Speleology- were administered acetazolamide from the. 72 hours prior to arrival at San Antonio de los Cobres, and for five days, which coincided with the work between 4,800 and 6,000 m.

    The doses administered were 250 mg every 12 hours, stopping in the last 36 hours before the descent, without any remarkable "puna" symptoms being recorded. Small headaches in three subjects subsided quickly, with the administration of an extra dose of acetazolamide or paracetamol.

    Two non-commissioned officers, neither adapted to the altitude nor medicated preventively, presented evidence of "puna" of varying severity, a few hours after arriving in San Antonio de los Cobres.  

	
The members of the expedition. From left to right: standing, Dr Eduardo Zappettini (Geologist), Mr Pablo Puig (Speleologist), Mr Julio Goyen Aguado (Speleologist), Dr Dick Adgardó. Ibarra Grasso (Anthropologist), Mr. Horacio Casellas (Museologist), Sarg Ramón Figueroa, Sarg Oscar Ángel Zanek, and seated, Mr. Eduardo Martínez (Geologist), Subalf Rubén Farias, Dr. Alfredo Romanelli (Chemist), Mr. Gustavo Cayaffo (Speleologist) and Cbo Iro César Ramón Palomo.

 

    These symptoms   quickly disappeared  with the administration of acetazolamide. One of them remained under control, receiving 250 mg of this drug every 12 hours, without showing signs of "puna".

    The clinical examinations of the members of the Speleology Section did not show relevant qualitative or quantitative changes, from sea level to 4,800 to 6,000 m, where the work was carried out. There was no increase in red blood cells, since this happens after the second week of permanence at critical heights (greater than 3,000 m).

    Various degrees of fatigue were observed at altitude, around 5,800 m, after fasting for more than 12 hours, and in general, after physical exertion, which would have also caused it at sea level.

    The low ambient temperature at night made it difficult to rest, which was solved by the use of flunitrazepam. The only side effect observed was tingling in different areas of the body, which disappeared with the administration of potassium.  

	
Base Camp at the foot of the Llullaillaco Volcano (6739 masl) in the 2nd Expedition of the Argentine Center of Speleology in April 1985

    The contribution to this work of Dr Miguel de Tezanos Pinto, Director of Hematology of the National Academy of Medicine, of the Chair of Physiology of the University of Buenos Aires, and especially Professor Dr Bernardo Lozada, who very generously contributed all his information on the subject of "puna". With the same dedication, the Alicia Acosta Biochemist carried out the corresponding laboratory tests free of charge in the city of Salta.

 

Conclusions

 After the experience carried out, two lines of conduct are suggested, namely: a) Prophylactic; b) Therapeutic.

a) In cases in which the subject knows in advance about their transfer to a puna area, start administering acetazolamide in doses of 250 mg every 12 hours, three days before traveling, and five more days in the place. The first night it is advisable to ensure a good rest by administering aminophylline associated with phenobarbital, which acts as a bronchodilator and sedative. One 1 mg flunitrazepam tablet may be given to adults, with a return charge if not consumed, for those who experience insomnia on the first or second day.

b) In individuals who, having to respond to an emergency situation, move to puna areas, start taking acetazolamide in doses of 500 mg every 12 hours, from the moment they prepare their transfer and for three days, reducing the dose to 250 mg every 12 hours, for another five days at altitude.

    Symptoms of "puna" have been described in already acclimatized personnel, which usually disappear with a single dose of 500 mg of acetazolamide.

    Children weighing more than 20 kg can take acetazolamide in doses of 125 mg every 12 hours, in the same sequence as adults. In the case of underweight children, a pediatrician should be consulted.

    Acetazolamide should be used with caution in the first trimester of pregnancy, and in case of transfer to critical height, a woman in this state should consult with the obstetrician.

    Potassium, in any dosage form, should be provided to item holders for administration to those experiencing tingling or cramping, which, by the way, is the only side effect observed in some individuals, during the days of administration.

    Acetazolamide does not record any dependence or antagonism with other drugs.

    Considering that the lower atmospheric pressure causes an increase in the volume of gases, the foods that produce them (beans, lentils, chickpeas, cauliflower, cabbage, soft drinks, etc.) will be avoided, or they will be neutralized with any of the products in the pharmaceutical market, available for this symptomatology.

    The suggested therapeutic technique can contribute to optimizing, in general terms, some aspects of the Gendarme's public function, eradicating a pathology that, although it is unlikely to endanger his life, can - and in fact does - reduce his efficiency.

 

(1) Dependent on the Geographic Department (Dir Icia).

(2) Dr. Martín Víctor Abarrategui was born in the Federal Capital on November 4, 1942. He completed his higher studies at the Faculty of Medicine of the National University of Buenos Aires, from which he graduated in 1967. In 1968 he took courses in postgraduate degree at the University of Oxford (England), on Radioisotopes in Medicine.He is a specialist in Legal Medicine, and a former professor at the UBA. He also works as a Medical Expert of the Federal Jurisdiction in the Courts of the Federal Capital. He joined the National Gendarmerie in 1984, currently serving in the Intelligence Directorate (Geographic Department, Speleology Section). He has taken courses on Sports Medicine in the country and abroad, acting as a doctor for various national and international teams in mountain competitions. Member of the Argentine Center of Speleology