How to prevent altitude sickness 
2 parts:prevent altitude sickness
Recognize the symptoms 

As you travel to higher and higher areas (such as those around mountains) there are many changes in the environment that can affect you. These include cold, low humidity, increased UV radiation from the sun, decreased air pressure, and reduced oxygen saturation. Altitude sickness is the body's reaction to low air and oxygen pressure that usually occurs at altitudes above 8,000 feet (2,438 m). [1] If you know you'll be traveling to high-altitude areas, follow these simple steps to prevent altitude sickness.

Part
one
prevent altitude sickness 
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 1 one
It rises little by little. When traveling to places of high altitude, you should try to get there slowly. The body normally needs 3 to 5 days at altitudes above 8,000 feet (2,438 m) to acclimatize to the new environment before traveling higher. To aid in this process (especially if you're going to be traveling to places where there are no altitude markers), buy an altimeter or altitude watch to track how high you've traveled. You can buy it online or at a mountain sports store.
There are other behaviors you should avoid. Climb no more than 9,000 feet (2,743 m) in altitude in 1 day. Sleep no higher than 1,000 to 2,000 feet (305 to 610 m) above the altitude at which you slept the night before. You should always spend an additional day acclimatizing for every 1,000 m (3,300 ft). [two]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 2 two
Rest. Another way to combat altitude sickness is to get enough rest. Domestic and international travel can disrupt normal sleep patterns. This can make you tired and dehydrated, which increases your risk of altitude sickness. Before you begin your ascent, plan on a day or two of rest to get used to your new environment and sleeping patterns, especially if you are traveling abroad.
Also, during the 3 to 5 days of acclimatization to the new altitude, rest the first one or two days before exploring the area.
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 33
Take prophylactic medications. Before embarking on a trip to high-altitude areas, get some medications that will help. Make an appointment with your doctor to prescribe prophylactic medication before you leave. Tell him about your medical history and explain that you're going to be climbing higher than 8,000 or 9,000 feet (2,438 or 2,743 m). If you are not allergic, your doctor may prescribe acetazolamide.
This is a drug approved by the FDA (Food and Drug Administration of the United States) to prevent and treat acute altitude sickness. Acetazolamide is a diuretic that increases urine output. It is known to cause increased respiratory ventilation which allows for greater exchange of oxygen in the body.
Take 125 mg twice a day (as prescribed), starting one day before departure and for two more days once you have reached peak altitude. [3] 
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 44
Try dexamethasone. If your doctor advises against the use of acetazolamide or if you are allergic, there are other options. You can take other medications not approved by the FDA, such as dexamethasone, which is a steroid. Studies have shown that this drug reduces the incidence and severity of acute altitude sickness.
Take as prescribed, typically 4 mg every 6 to 12 hours starting the day before you depart until the day you are fully acclimatized to the highest altitude.
You can also take 600 mg of ibuprofen every 8 hours to prevent acute altitude sickness.
Ginkgo biloba (or tree of the forty shields) has been studied to treat and prevent altitude sickness, but the results are varied and its use is not recommended. [4]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 55
Get a test to check your red blood cells (RBCs). Before embarking on your trip, it is necessary to have your red blood cells checked. Make an appointment with your doctor to do this test before you leave. If you're diagnosed with anemia or a low red blood cell count, your doctor might recommend correcting it before you leave for your trip. This is essential because red blood cells carry oxygen to tissues and organs and are necessary for survival.
There are many reasons for a low red blood cell count, the most common being iron deficiency. Vitamin B deficiency can also lead to low red blood cell count. If this is the case for you, your doctor might recommend taking iron or B vitamin supplements to correct the problem. [5]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 66
Buy coca leaves. If you travel to Central or South America to climb mountains, you should buy coca leaves while you are there. Although it is an illegal substance in many countries, people living in these areas use it to avoid altitude sickness. If you are going to travel to these areas, you can buy the leaves and chew them or make them into a tea.
You should be aware that even 1 cup of tea can cause you to test positive for cocaine. Coca is a stimulant and studies have shown that it induces biochemical changes that enhance physical performance at high altitudes. [6]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 77
Drink a lot of water. Dehydration reduces the body's ability to acclimatize to new altitudes. Drink 2 to 3 liters a day, starting the day before you travel. Carry an additional 1 liter of water with you during your ascent. Make sure to drink as needed during the descent.
Do not drink alcohol and avoid it during the first 48 hours of the trip. Alcohol is a depressant and can slow down your breathing and cause dehydration.
You should also avoid caffeinated products, such as energy drinks and sodas. Caffeine can cause muscle dehydration. [7]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 88
Eat properly. There are certain foods that you should eat to prepare for the trip and prevent altitude sickness. High-carbohydrate diets have been shown to relieve symptoms of acute altitude sickness, as well as improve mood and physical performance. [8] Other studies have also shown that carbohydrates improved blood oxygen saturation during simulated experiments at high altitudes. [9] Carbohydrate-based diets are thought to improve energy balance. Eat carbohydrate-rich diets before and during acclimatization periods.
This can include pastas, breads, fruits, and potato-based foods. [10]
In addition, it is necessary to avoid excess salt. Too much salt will cause dehydration of body tissues. When you go to the supermarket, look for foods with low or no salt content.
It might be a good idea to improve your endurance and physical conditioning before heading up the mountain. However, studies have shown that there is no evidence that good physical condition protects against altitude sickness. [11] [12]
Part
two 
Recognize the symptoms
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 9one
Learn what the different types of altitude sickness are. There are 3 types of altitude sickness: acute altitude sickness, high altitude cerebral edema (HACE) and high altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE).
Acute altitude sickness is due to reduced air pressure and oxygen.
High altitude cerebral edema (ACE) is a severe progression of acute altitude sickness that occurs due to swelling of the brain and leakage of dilated cerebral vessels.
Altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) can occur along with ACE, on its own after acute altitude sickness, or develop 1 to 4 days after traveling above 2,438 m (8,000 ft). It is caused by swelling of the lungs due to fluid leaking into them caused by high pressure and narrowing of the pulmonary vessels. [13]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 10two 
Recognize acute altitude sickness. It is a relatively common disease in certain parts of the world. Affects 25% of people traveling above 8,000 feet (2,438 m) in the US state of Colorado, 50% of people visiting the Himalayas, and 85% of those traveling to the region of Mount Everest. This condition has many symptoms.
These include headache 2 to 12 hours after reaching a new altitude, difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep, dizziness, tiredness, increased heart rate, shortness of breath while moving, and nausea or vomiting. [14]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 113 
Recognize high altitude cerebral edema (ACE). Since this is a serious extension of acute altitude sickness, you will first manifest the symptoms described above. As the condition intensifies, you will get other symptoms. These include ataxia, which is the inability to walk straight, or the tendency to stagger when walking or walking diagonally. You may also suffer from an altered mental status, which can manifest as drowsiness, confusion, changes in speech, memory, mobility, thoughts, and attention span.
Also, you could lose consciousness or go into a coma.
As with acute altitude sickness, ACE is rare. It only affects 0.1 to 4% of people. [fifteen]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 124
See if you have high altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE). Since this can be a complication of ACE, you could experience the symptoms of acute altitude sickness and ACE. However, since it can arise on its own, you should watch for symptoms as a separate condition. You may experience dyspnea, which is shortness of breath when you're at rest. You may also feel tightness and pain in your chest, wheezing when exhaling from your lungs, increased heart rate and breathing, and coughing.
Additionally, you may notice a physical change such as cyanosis, a condition where your mouth and fingers become darker or bluish.
As with ECA, EPA is relatively rare. It affects 0.1 to 4% of people. [16]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 135
Treat the symptoms. Even if you try to prevent altitude sickness, it's always possible. If this is the case, you should be careful not to make it worse. If you have acute altitude sickness, wait up to 12 hours for symptoms to improve. If these do not improve after this time, immediately descend at least 305 m (1,000 ft). If you can't descend, oxygen treatment should help relieve your symptoms within a few hours. At this point, check again for any improvements.
If you are dealing with the signs or symptoms of ACE or EPA, descend immediately with as little effort as possible so as not to aggravate the symptoms. Then you should check back regularly for any improvement.
If it is not possible to descend due to weather conditions or other reasons, take oxygen to increase the oxygen pressure. Put the mask on your face and the tube of the mask on the mouthpiece of the tank, then release the oxygen. They may also put you in a portable hyperbaric chamber. If available, then descent may not be necessary as long as symptoms are not as severe and treatment is working. It is a lightweight device that is normally carried by rescue teams or found at rescue stations. If you have access to a radio or phone, alert the rescue team, tell them your location, and await their arrival. [17]
Image titled Prevent Altitude Sickness Step 146
Take emergency drugs. There are some medications that your doctor might give you in an emergency. To treat acute altitude sickness, you might be given acetazolamide or dexamethasone. To treat ACE, you might be given dexamethasone. Take the pills right away and swallow them with water.
Your doctor may also prescribe emergency drugs for EPA, which are non-FDA-approved drugs that serve as prophylaxis and treatment for EPA. Small-scale studies have shown that some drugs reduce the incidence of EPA if taken 24 hours before travel. These are: nifedipine (Procardia), salmeterol (Serevent), phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors such as tadalafil (Cialis), and sildenafil (Viagra). [18]
warnings
If you have symptoms of altitude sickness, do not continue climbing, especially to sleep.
If your symptoms get worse or don't go away after a while, go down.
If you suffer from certain conditions, your condition could be aggravated at high altitude. In addition, it may be necessary for the doctor to carry out a series of diagnostic tests before the trip to have more security. Such conditions include: arrhythmias, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), suggestive severe heart failure, coronary artery disease, high blood pressure, pulmonary hypertension, and sickle cell anemia. You also run the risk of getting sick if you take narcotic pain medications, which slow down your breathing.
Pregnant women should not sleep at altitudes above 3,650 m (12,000 ft)