Altitude sickness: serious symptoms and treatment
make a question
Dysgraphie - DefinitionRFDysgraphia - DefinitionUSAltitude sickness: serious symptoms and treatmentIS
September 2017


When should I be alarmed?
Treatment
People who should never be exposed to high altitudes
People who should be careful about height
The best: prevention 
Know more
See also: Soroche treatment

When should I be alarmed?
Mild symptoms of altitude sickness usually develop in the first 36 hours. They appear in more than 50% of travelers above 3,500 meters and in almost 100% of people who climb rapidly to 5,000 meters without acclimatizing.
A mild headache that goes away with pain relievers (paracetamol, aspirin, etc.).
Nausea, upset stomach, and general malaise.
dizziness
Difficulty sleeping.

If these symptoms appear at altitudes below 3,000 meters, you should stop and rest for 2 days before continuing to climb. At altitudes of 3,500 meters, try to go down to 300 to 500 meters, and stay there for 2 days before other permanent ascents.
Serious symptoms of altitude sickness
An intense and severe headache, which does not go away with painkillers.
Major nausea, vomiting.
dizziness
Incoordination: It can give the impression that the person is drunk without having had alcohol.
Visual disturbances.
Sensation of tightness in the chest.
Rapid breathing and pulse.
Feeling of shortness of breath.
Swelling or edema, usually around the eyes and, in some cases, in the ankles and hands.
Decreased amount of urine.
Confusion, disorientation.
Psychological changes: indifference, loss of sense of danger.
seizures
The two most feared manifestations, which can lead to death, are pulmonary edema and cerebral edema. It usually appears between 24 and 96 hours after the ascent.



When these symptoms occur, seek medical help immediately and quickly begin the descent to the lowest possible height.
Treatment
If symptoms are mild, these measures are usually sufficient:
Rest on the same ground for 24 - 48 hours.
Abundant hydration.
Hyperglycidic diet.


Climbing should be prohibited for people suffering from symptoms of altitude sickness -even if they are mild- as they can evolve into more serious forms.
If symptoms are more severe or get worse:
The descent should be started quickly at the lowest possible height.
This descent must always be carried out accompanied by another person.
Sometimes a descent of 400 meters is usually enough to notice an improvement.
Administer oxygen through a mask.
Minor analgesics (paracetamol, aspirin) can be used for headaches.
Altitude insomnia should be treated with acetazolamide. Hypnotic or sedative drugs such as those commonly used for sleep should never be administered, as they can further worsen breathing.


If a doctor is available, he or she will be able to administer any medications you feel are necessary. Medication is not a substitute for descent.
People who should never be exposed to high altitudes
Those with severe chronic heart or lung disease: ischemic heart disease (angina pectoris), severe COPD, severe asthma.
People with sickle cell anemia, including sickle cell anemia (low hemoglobin content in the blood).
People with untreated blood clotting problems and a history of thrombosis (clots).
People with a history of cerebral edema or pulmonary edema.

People who should be careful about height
People with mild heart/lung disease.
Pregnant women: There is not much information about the risk of altitude sickness during pregnancy. It is difficult to say whether going to a place with a high altitude is safe for pregnant women. It is generally recommended that pregnant women do not travel to an altitude above 2,438.4 m.
Children – have a harder time adjusting to low oxygen levels and may not be able to recognize symptoms of altitude sickness. Therefore, parents and other adults should watch carefully for any signs of altitude sickness in children.
The hypertensive.
People who have sleep apnea syndrome.



Other problems that can occur in high mountains are: sunburn, temporary blindness caused by snow (ophthalmia) or cold and frostbite.
Being overweight does not increase the risk of developing altitude sickness.
The best: prevention 
The best way to avoid altitude sickness is to ascend slowly.
The ascent must be slow, at the pace in which each person feels comfortable.
Avoid forcing the body, spend a night halfway if necessary.
A possible guideline is to take a couple of days to climb to 2,500 meters, and then an extra day for every additional 300-700 meters.
Being in good physical shape does not guarantee that altitude sickness will not develop: sometimes it is even counterproductive if the person trusts their physical condition too much and ignores precautionary recommendations.
Avoid intense physical exercises for a few days after arriving at the destination.
Drink a lot of liquids.
Low salt diet, avoid salty foods.
Eat several times a day in moderate amounts, take foods rich in carbohydrates.
Avoid alcohol.
