PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF ALTITUDE SICKNESS

PREVENTION

Reflecting on the accidents that have occurred in the mountains can be very useful for us to avoid the mistakes made in those cases. The first rule to follow for the prevention of altitude sickness is to climb slowly, to give the body time to acclimatize.

The daily ascent guidelines outlined above can be of great practical use. If mild symptoms of altitude sickness appear during the ascent, rest for 24-48 hours. may be enough. If the symptoms do not disappear or worsen, the descent is imperative and must always be done accompanied. It will descend, at least, about 400 meters remaining at rest at the lower level for at least two days.

It seems that the hyperglycidic diet, rich in carbohydrates, starches, sugars that favor acclimatization and has an effect comparable to the decrease in physiological altitude by about 700 m. represents that at 4000 m. , following this type of diet, for the body we would only be at 3,300 m. During the resting phase in the lower fields, the diet based on protein and fat must be rebalanced.

PREVENTION OF ALTITUDE SICKNESS
Slow Ascent: do not exceed 400 m./ day of elevation gain, from 3,500 m.
Plan rest days: sleep at the same height two consecutive nights
Hyperglucidic diet: rich in sugars, starches.
Mild symptoms: do not continue the ascent until you have recovered.
More intense symptoms: immediate descent, always accompanied.
TREATMENT:

Rest, good hydration and a hyperglycemic diet are enough to treat mild cases, which resolve within 24-48 hours. The ascent should be prohibited for people who suffer from symptoms of altitude sickness -even if they are mild- as its evolution is potentially very dangerous in people who are poorly acclimatized and who continue to climb, despite presenting symptoms of altitude sickness.

If the symptoms worsen in the course of the next few hours, the descent of the affected person must be organized, always accompanied and, if possible, below 400 m. of the elevation where they are previously located.

To treat the headache symptomatically, once the previous instructions have been followed, common analgesics can be used - ASA, paracetamol - and if the pain is very intense, analgesic associations with codeine, caffeine or ergotamine. Forced hyperventilation for 10 to 15 minutes has also been proposed, as well as massage of the temporal arteries.

In expert hands, acupuncture therapy or reflex therapy can be used, which has been useful. Coca- Erythroxylon Coca, the divine plant of the Incas- can also be used in the form of chewed leaves, mother tincture or in dynamited solutions -homeopathic- safer, by avoiding its side effects or overdose.

Apart from coca, which is traditionally and historically known for its effectiveness in altitude sickness-puna or soroche for the Indians-; Acetazolamide has been shown to be effective in treating its symptoms, as well as the phenomenon of periodic breathing, which can cause insomnia. The dose ranges from 250 to 500 mg. Its effects include: increased cerebral blood flow, decreased formation and pressure of CSF (cerebrospinal fluid), improved kidney function with decreased proteinuria, hypoxia and, most importantly, metabolic acidification. , which acts as a respiratory stimulant and secondarily as a promoter of better tissue oxygenation. It has a moderate diuretic effect.

As for insomnia at altitude, especially if it is caused by periodic pauses in breathing, it should be treated with acetazolamide, but never with hypnotics or sedatives, which can further worsen the critical imbalance in oxygenation by depressing breathing. If the Mountaineer is well acclimatized and the insomnia is due to reasons of emotional tension, sedatives or anxiolytics can be used but at low doses - usually half the usual dose - and of the fast-acting type and short half-life - for example , triazolam- which after eight hours have already ceased to act and will not interfere with subsequent activity.

Serious symptoms

Do not delay the descent, start it at night if necessary.
Do not wait for the arrival of the helicopter or rescue group Start the descent immediately.
The patient must always be accompanied.
The patient may not be able to make the right decisions: it must be insisted, even if it is against his will, he must descend.
Medication is not a substitute for descent. If there is a doctor available, he can administer medicines and oxygen.
The patient must descend even if medical treatment has been administered.