What is altitude sickness? Causes, symptoms and treatment
Mount Everest: Maria Strydom and Robert Gropel's tragic adventure
How 43 people died on the world's highest trekking pass
Monash University lecturer Maria Strydom is thought to have died of altitude sickness while attempting an ascent of Mount Everest, after fluid swelled in her brain. Her husband, Robert Gropel, suffered heart problems on the same climb. 

What is it like to climb Everest?
The world's highest mountain has a dark side - so why do people keep climbing it?

Up to half of all people who ascend above 2500 metres suffer severe altitude sickness, according to a survey of the medical literature, published in the British Medical Journal in 2010.

This can include fluid accumulation on the lungs (pulmonary oedema) and on the brain (cerebral oedema). 

SHARE ON FACEBOOKSHARE
SHARE ON TWITTERTWEETLINK
Maria Strydom, who died on a climb to the summit of Mount Everest, and her husband Robert Gropal.
Maria Strydom, who died on a climb to the summit of Mount Everest, and her husband Robert Gropal. Photo: Facebook
What causes it?
Altitude sickness occurs when people ascend heights too quickly. The faster the ascent, the greater the likelihood of altitude sickness. The human body does not have time to adjust and suffers hypobaric hypoxia, in which oxygen fails to reach the body's tissues. 

Some studies have reported men are more at risk of developing altitude sickness than women. 

People who have experienced the condition in the past are at greater risk on future ascents, according to the Harvard Medical School. Obesity and genetics may also play a role.

BREAKING NEWS ALERT
Get the latest news and updates emailed straight to your inbox.
Enter your email address
By submitting your email you are agreeing to Fairfax Media's terms and conditions and privacy policy .

What are the symptoms?
Climbers will experience normal changes in their bodies as they ascend and the carbon dioxide level lowers, including slight shortness of breath and frequent urination.

SHARE ON FACEBOOKSHARE
SHARE ON TWITTERTWEETLINK
Maria Strydom was an experienced mountaineer who had successfully climbed Denali in Alaska, Aconcagua in Argentina, ...
Maria Strydom was an experienced mountaineer who had successfully climbed Denali in Alaska, Aconcagua in Argentina, Mount Ararat in eastern Turkey and Kilimanjaro in Africa. Photo: Monash University
Initial symptoms of altitude sickness include:

Headache 
Weakness
Fatigue
Dizziness
Appetite loss
Loss of co-ordination
Insomnia
Nausea
Vomiting
More severe symptoms include:

Coughing
Breathlessness
Irrational behaviour
Blue or grey tinged skin and nails
Inability to walk 
Frothy, blood tinged spit caused by lung damage
Inability to walk straight or sit up
Visual hallucinations
Fever
The most severe outcomes of altitude sickness are coma and death. A sufferer of cerebral oedema may not notice their symptoms because the condition distorts their thinking. 

Prevention and treatment
The Victorian government's health channel, Better Health, recommends climbers see their doctor before attempting a steep ascent, avoid cigarettes, alcohol and sleeping tablets, and increase fluid intake. 

Drugs such as dexamethasone and acetazolamide may reduce the risk of developing milder altitude sickness but their effectiveness is under-explored, according to the British Medical Journal review. 

Climbers who have experienced severe altitude sickness should descend immediately. In less severe cases, wait for symptoms to subside at the current altitude.

Diuretic drugs may reduce fluid accumulation and portable oxygen cylinders can be used to address deprivation. 

After descent, patients may be treated in hyperbaric chambers - specially designed rooms with extra oxygen and increased atmospheric pressure.

Fairfax Media