Therapy
mountain sickness
With the increase in travel to areas located at high altitudes and with the growing interest in outdoor activities and extreme sports, many people began to have questions about the degree of danger of mountaineering, trekking, and simply being at high altitude.
Ask a question to a therapist
Buy medicines
View Institutions

Causes of altitude sickness
Altitude sickness is associated with a lack of oxygen in the air, which occurs at high altitude due to the difference in atmospheric pressure compared to that at sea level. In its mildest form, it can appear at an altitude of about 2000 meters.

Mountain sickness symptoms
The mild form of the illness usually includes headache , nausea, trouble breathing, palpitations, weakness, and decreased activity. These symptoms usually disappear after a few days if the person remains at the same altitude.

A more serious condition occurs at an altitude of 3000 meters above sea level or more. In addition to the already listed symptoms of the disease, there is a decrease or loss of appetite and insomnia , intermittent sleep due to periodic breathing (when a person breathes normally for some time, and then his breathing stops for 10-15 seconds, as a result of which he wakes up). Severe breathing difficulties, vomiting, frequent coughing, loss of coordination and loss of consciousness are among the most serious symptoms and require immediate descent or placement of the patient in a portable pressure chamber. Conditions corresponding to increased atmospheric pressure are artificially created in the pressure chamber, and they give the same effect as lowering the altitude.

What can you do
The best way to prevent altitude sickness is to gradually gain altitude, that is, reach the designated point within a few days. If this is not possible, for example, you have a short flight from sea level to an altitude of 3000 meters or more, you can take medications. You should consult a doctor who will prescribe you a drug, which is started 2 or 3 days before the planned trip.
At altitude, it is important to try to keep the maximum amount of fluid in the body, because. dehydration contributes to the development of altitude sickness. It must be taken into account that when breathing in the cold high above sea level, as well as when evaporating with sweat, a large amount of fluid is lost, especially during such active activities as skiing and trekking.
If you are planning to participate in a trip with a large elevation change in a short time, discuss the possible problems with your doctor.

Preventive measures
Who is at risk?
There is no way to predict whether a person will get altitude sickness or not. Surprisingly, age, lack of physical fitness and the presence of various diseases such as asthma do not affect the incidence of mountain sickness. And if you have had this disease before, this does not mean that you will definitely have it again (although you can assume that you have become more prone to altitude sickness). Accordingly, there is no guarantee that if you have never had altitude sickness before, you will not have it in the future.