altitude sicknessAltitude sickness, also called acute mountain sickness (AMS), hypobaropathy, Acosta's disease, Poona is a disease caused by being at high altitude, where the air pressure is very low, without undergoing an acclimatization process (a process of gradual exposure). If this happens, it will happen at over 8,000 feet (2,500 meters) - 8,000 meters (a common altitude for many ski resorts). More severe symptoms usually appear above 3,600 meters (12,000 feet). Acute mountain sickness can progress with increasing altitude to pulmonary edema , or at even higher altitudes to cerebral edema .People with altitude sickness usually experience severe headache , nausea , dizziness, and a feeling of exhaustion.At sea level, the atmospheric concentration of oxygen approaches 21%, atmospheric pressure averages 760 mm Hg. At high altitudes, 21% of oxygen remains the same, but the number of oxygen molecules per breath decreases. At about 5,500 meters (18,000 feet), each breath contains about half the normal amount of oxygen (compared to sea level). In order to compensate for the lack of oxygen, a person must breathe faster and the heart must beat faster. But even an accelerated breathing rate, which raises the level of oxygen in the blood, does not help to achieve the concentration that is present at sea level.Climbing to high altitudes can cause fluid to leak from tiny blood vessels (capillaries), resulting in a potentially dangerous buildup of fluid in the lungs and/or brain. If a person continues to climb to high altitudes without proper acclimatization, there is a serious risk of life-threatening diseases.According to the UK National Health Service:Altitude sickness is quite common among skiers, climbers and people who spend time at high altitudes.Above 3,000 meters (10,000 feet), about three-quarters of people will experience mild symptoms.20-25% of skiers and hikers in Colorado (USA) and 53% in Periche (Nepal) develop symptoms of altitude sickness.About 34% of people in the Swiss Alps who climb to 3,600 meters (12,000 feet) or more experience some degree of altitude sickness.Altitude sickness does not exist in the UK. The height of Ben Nevis in Scotland, the highest mountain in the UK, is 1,344 meters (4,406 feet). No matter how fast you climb, you won't get altitude sickness.What is the difference between chronic mountain sickness and acute mountain sickness?Chronic mountain sickness (CHS), also known as Monge's disease, develops when a person spends a lot of time at high altitudes (more than 3000 meters). Acute mountain sickness develops soon after a rapid ascent to high altitude.What are the signs and symptoms of altitude sickness?Symptoms are what the patient feels and reports, while a sign is what other people, such as a doctor, find. For example, pain may be a symptom while a rash may be a sign.The severity of symptoms and when they occur depends on several factors, including:gender, age, weight, blood pressure, physical fitness, etc.the speed at which people climbedhow much time was spent at high altitude.The main symptom for diagnosing altitude sickness is headache. However, one of the symptoms of dehydration is also a headache. Therefore, for a correct diagnosis, according to experts, the patient must be at least 2,500 meters (8,000 feet) high, have a headache, and have at least one of the symptoms listed below:Lack of appetite, nausea, vomitingExhaustion or weaknessDizzinessInsomniaSkin tinglingFeeling short of breath on exertionFeeling sleepyGeneral malaiseSwelling of the hands, feet and face (peripheral oedema).The following symptoms may indicate something more serious, possibly life-threatening altitude sickness:Fluid in the lungs (high-altitude pulmonary edema):Persistent dry cough, often with pinkish sputumFeverShortness of breath (even during rest).cerebral edemaPersistent headache. Painkillers do not help relieve pain.Unsteady gait, clumsinessIncreased frequency of vomitingGradual loss of consciousnessNumbness, dizziness.What are the causes of altitude sickness?The main cause of altitude sickness is climbing too fast. It can also be caused by too high an altitude and staying at that altitude for too long. The human body needs to adapt to lower air pressure and lower oxygen levels - for this it needs gradual addiction (acclimatization).The average human body needs 1 to 3 days to get used to the change in altitude. People who do not spend enough time acclimatizing to new heights have the highest risk of developing altitude sickness more than others.Altitude sickness - our body's response to a lower supply of oxygen to the muscles and brain - can become serious and fatal.If less oxygen enters the blood, the heart and lungs are forced to work with high loads, with an increase in heart rate and respiration. Most red blood cells become unable to deliver oxygen to the tissues of the body. Our body responds to changes in altitude with blood acidity, lung pressure, electrolyte and fluid levels, and changes in salt balance.Altitude sickness diagnosisIf a person has climbed above 2,500 feet and is experiencing a headache, plus at least one of the symptoms listed above, then an accurate diagnosis is fairly easy to make.The first symptoms of altitude sickness are usually headache, dizziness, fatigue, insomnia and indigestion. Those people in whom these symptoms are aggravated and aggravated should immediately stop climbing, and even descend to a lower level and remain in a state of rest until the symptoms completely disappear.What are the treatment options for altitude sickness?Signs and symptoms of altitude sickness should not be ignored, as possible complications of the condition can be fatal. Mortality from altitude sickness used to happen much more often, mainly because people did not notice the signs or symptoms (or chose to ignore them).People with very mild symptoms may continue to climb, but at a much slower pace. It is important that people be aware of existing symptoms, no matter how minor they may be.People with slightly more severe symptoms should: Completely relax and unwind Consume plenty of non-alcoholic liquids No smoking.decline  Dropping to a lower altitude is probably the best thing to do if symptoms show up. Attempts to treat or stabilize the patient's condition on the spot, at a height, are dangerous, if at this height there is no possibility of monitoring the condition and medical equipment. People with mild symptoms usually respond well if they descend only 1,000 feet (300 meters) and stay there for 24 hours. If a person with mild symptoms stays at this altitude for a few days, his body will fully acclimate and he can start climbing again.People with severe symptoms should descend at least 2,000 feet (600 meters) as soon as possible. If this is not done quickly, there is a risk of serious, life-threatening complications. People whose symptoms do not improve after descending 600 meters should continue to descend until they feel better.Pure oxygen - Giving pure oxygen to a person with severe breathing problems caused by altitude sickness can help. Oxygen is usually provided by doctors at mountain resorts.Gamow container - its use during a rapid descent is not possible. This is a portable plastic pressure chamber with a foot pump. It can be used to effectively lower altitude down to 1,500 meters (5,000 feet). This is usually used as an aid to evacuate patients with severe symptoms rather than getting them to high altitude.The coca plant is a folk remedy for altitude sickness in Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia. Tea is made from coca leaves.Painkillers such as Tylenol (paracetamol) and ibuprofen can be taken for headaches.Acetazolamide - This medicine corrects the chemical imbalance in the blood caused by altitude sickness and also speeds up the patient's breathing. If a person can breathe faster, their body will be saturated with more oxygen, resulting in an alleviation of some symptoms such as nausea, dizziness, and headache. This medicine has some possible side effects, including a tingling sensation on the face, fingers and toes, frequent urination, blurred vision (rare).Dexamethasone is a potent synthetic drug of glucocorticoids, a class of steroid hormones. It acts as an anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant. Its effectiveness is 20-30 times more than hydrocortisone and 4-5 times more than prednisone. It is an effective drug for the treatment of cerebral edema, one of the complications of altitude sickness - it reduces swelling (inflammation) of the brain. Patients usually experience improvement within about six hours. This medicine has some possible side effects, including upset stomach, depression, and euphoria.Nifedipine is a dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker commonly used to treat hypertension (high blood pressure). It is effective in treating pulmonary edema (fluid buildup in the lungs). This medicine reduces the narrowing of the pulmonary artery, resulting in less pressure on the chest and easier breathing. Since blood pressure may drop suddenly after taking this medicine, patients are advised not to get up too quickly.What are the possible complications of mountain sickness?The two main complications of altitude sickness are:high-altitude cerebral edemaThe lack of oxygen causes fluid to leak through the tiny blood vessels (capillaries) as well as a rush of fluid into the brain, which swells. Typically, high-altitude cerebral edema occurs when someone stays at altitude for at least one week. If left untreated, death is likely to occur. The patient must descend at least 600 meters (2000 feet) immediately.high-altitude pulmonary edemaFluid builds up in the lungs, preventing oxygen from reaching the blood. As high-altitude pulmonary edema progresses, the oxygen level in the patient's blood will decrease and blueness (cyanosis) of the skin will begin to develop, breathing becomes difficult, the chest is constricted, there is a constant cough with pinkish sputum, the patient will feel exhausted and weak, confusion and feeling disorientation. If high-altitude pulmonary edema is not treated, death will be the likely outcome. Also, in case of high-altitude pulmonary edema, the patient should descend at least 600 meters (2000 feet) immediately.Both of these complications are rare, but can happen if someone climbs to a very high altitude too quickly and stays there.Altitude sickness warningClimbers should be informed about the risks, symptoms, and treatments for mountain sickness. If the climb will take place in a remote mountainous area, it is important to be prepared and take precautions.Acclimatization is the best way to prevent altitude sickness by ascending gradually so that your body has time to acclimate to the change in altitude. Plan your adaptation and make sure the trip includes enough time for this. Make sure everyone in the group is fully acclimatized before climbing.Vacation Packages - Beware of vacation packages that promise to take you up the mountain in a matter of days.Fluids - consume 4 to 6 liters of water per day.Food - Consume high calorie foods while you are at high altitude.Worsening of symptoms - with mild symptoms that get worse as you go up, you should come down immediately.Sleep - at an altitude of more than 3000 meters, climb no more than 300 meters every evening. In other words, don't sleep more than 300 meters higher than you slept last night. Even if you climbed more than 300 meters during the day, go back down before going to bed so that you are no more than 300 meters higher than the night before when you went to bed.Smoking - no smoking.Alcohol - Do not drink alcoholic beverages. Acetazolamide/Dexamethasone - These medications may also be used to prevent altitude sickness.Moderate Symptoms - Individuals with moderate symptoms should remain at their current altitude until their symptoms are completely gone.Other medicines - Some medicines may make symptoms worse at high altitude or as altitude increases, including tranquilizers and sleeping pills.A detailed description of the disease Altitude sickness, answers to the questions: what is Altitude sickness? how to treat altitude sickness? Symptoms, diagnosis and prevention of altitude sickness, possible treatments, drugs and preparations.