Altitude Sickness (Mountain Drunkenness) – Altitude Sickness 
Posted on 03 May 2013by kuzeykaya
It was 2005, if I'm not mistaken, the President of Bolivia at the time, who erupted in the sports news about FIFA's meeting to not play the national match in Bolivia anymore, said, “We are from Bolivia and we do not want to play our matches outside of Bolivia!” I watched the description. FIFA's justification was that playing a match in Bolivia at high altitude (2500 m and above) would endanger the health of the athletes. It was an absurd justification (in my opinion) and the president was perfectly right in his reproach.
Of course, at that time, I had no idea about altitude sickness. Though LonelyplanetAlthough I read about altitude sickness, its causes, symptoms and precautions, I could not fully understand it until it happened to me. Moreover, since we two black illiterates do not know the altitudes of the cities we live in (Istanbul: 34 m, Izmir: 30 m, Artvin: 700 m), we took no precautions with absurd confidence and went on the purest journey of our lives (Jujuy, Argentina - Atacama, Chile).
While going from Jujuy to Atacama by bus, the altitude increased from 1500 m to 4800 m in 4 hours (I think the altitude can be a little brighter if I say Mount Ararat is 5100 m and can be climbed with an oxygen mask). A terrible headache, nausea, shortness of breath, weakness, loss of appetite, earache, etc. Those who faint and vomit when we get off the bus at the Chilean border… We are still unaware that we have altitude sickness. Apart from using drugs against altitude sickness, the following precautions should be taken: drinking plenty of water, eating less, not drinking alcohol, and chewing coca leaves. When we climbed to 4800 m (which we learned later) with half a liter of water, we experienced all the signs of helplessness. Headache by drinking plenty of water, chewing coca leaf and resting for a few days,

Anyway, if one day you happen to be in one of the following cities in South America, take the necessary precautions:
All cities of Bolivia, Atacama (Chile), Jujuy (Argentina)-Atacama (Chile) journey, Cusco (Peru), Quito (Equator) , Bogotá (Colombia)

Height states…