Although altitude sickness is a relatively natural affliction caused by lack of oxygen at high altitudes, psychopathological greatness syndrome represents a condition with very serious consequences.
Instead of self-development, humiliation, low flying, and intellectual sterility tend towards different compensations and are increasingly reflected in the opposite; when he cannot cope with criticism or clear thinking, it turns into disdain for anyone who has a different opinion; a leap of “absolute greatness” with gradual total loss of consciousness; the search of some of the people to increase their oppression by identifying with false greatness….
Among the symptoms of the disease, first of all, anyone who breaks conventions and traditions and criticizes the leadership is declared a traitor. Xenephonie is one of the most common forms of hate speech.
Both the vehicle and the shelter are generally traditions, and religion (Sheikh, Caliphate, etc.) and ethnicity (Turkish, German, etc.) stand out as the safest shelter. The problem here is not belonging to a certain religion, language or ethnic group, but seeing it as the only value above all, being superior to others.

There is such a great littleness that it needs power, office, going on top, seizing the representation of traditions at a morbid level; Capturing the representation of the convention is turned into a base for legitimacy and a means of attacking opponents.
When he took the leadership, he got all the power; that he is now the main carrier of the tradition, both the sacred and the "legitimate" carrier, that all kinds of authority, including customs, morals, good or bad, whatever is to be done and not done, has passed into itself; He thinks that he came out victorious from every process. Moreover, it becomes invisible even that he is actually ignoring conventions.
He thinks that he is a specially created person, that he was sent with special missions and that he shaped the age himself; When combined with the flattery of the accomplices, the question that it might be different becomes the only "truth" that cannot be asked.
The sheikh does not fly, the disciple does, and the sheikh is ready to fly. Now, when the assumption that power and tradition is itself combined with smallness, everyone who does not follow their own leadership, who claims to represent tradition, is increasingly turned into an enemy.
As soon as he loses the chance to face reality, his healthy perception and reasoning abilities begin to deteriorate.
If not propaganda, all this turns into a totalitarian gross error; propaganda deepens the morbid situation; A vicious circle begins, on the one hand, the leadership necessitates the constant propaganda of greatness, on the other hand, the propaganda needs the emphasis on greatness and the sanctity of leadership.

Intolerance of the different, censorship, lynching attempts, the search for war in the form of great victory are increasing.
Health; physical, mental and social well-being of a person; social health with its population, institution, culture, city, street, politics and the state of "wellness", as totalitarianism increases, the state of health both as an individual and as a society deteriorates to that extent.
As the state of health deteriorates and the pain increases, mild narcosis does not save the situation, more severe remedies are resorted to, up to morphine; The situation of propaganda, suppression, exclusion, hostility, and conflict increases even more.
Our minds and structures are both distorted, arrogance has long ceased to be an exaggerated sign of life, a tool for treatment, a tool for self-esteem needs; to the sultanate, the Great Roman Kingdom, III. Abdulhamid Era, new Hitlers, new Mussolinis are approaching; If internal and external balances fail to normalize the situation, revolutions are imminent.
Controlling universities, trying to control the media completely, religion, hymns, folk songs, the leader's speeches all day, then tens of thousands of speeches by the accomplices about the greatness and perfection of the leader, in short, the operation of propaganda techniques 24 hours a day, the prosecutor's commitment to the leadership, are the most important indicators of totalitarianism. . If the situation cannot be normalized, on the one hand, the wars will get tougher, on the other hand, the revolutions will get closer.