altitude sickness      Altitude sickness is a painful condition that occurs when climbing to high (from three thousand meters) heights due to a decrease in the partial pressure of oxygen in the inhaled air.      I. The etiology of altitude sickness (causes of altitude sickness)      The disease develops as a result of oxygen starvation - hypoxia, which, in turn, leads to dysfunction of individual organs and systems. When climbing to a height of up to three thousand meters in physically healthy people, oxygen deficiency is compensated by increased pulmonary ventilation (a person's breathing quickens, its depth increases). Also, at the same time, blood flow is accelerated, and the number of red blood cells and hemoglobin in the blood increases.	 The lack of oxygen in the surrounding air leads to a sharp decrease in the partial pressure of oxygen in the lungs and, in turn, a decrease in arterial oxygen saturation.      II. Clinical manifestations of altitude sickness (symptoms of altitude sickness)      Among the main signs of altitude sickness are dizziness, drowsiness, headache, shortness of breath, palpitations, tinnitus, nausea, muscle weakness, sweating, blurred vision and others. The development of these symptoms depends on the rate of ascent and on the general condition of the body.      There are collaptoid and syncope forms of altitude sickness. The first develops during a long stay at altitudes from five to seven thousand meters. With this form, the intensity of adaptive reactions of the cardiovascular system and respiration increases, the state of health worsens and bradycardia develops, and blood pressure drops sharply and for a long time.      Another form of altitude sickness begins at altitudes of eight to nine thousand meters and is manifested by a sudden loss of consciousness, after the restoration of which comes retrograde amnesia. It is possible to independently restore suppressed functions after the elimination of hypoxia only by staying at that height for no more than five minutes. With a longer stay (from five to ten minutes), due to an acute lack of oxygen, irreversible disorders begin, including cerebral edema, decortication, and posthypoxic encephalopathy.      Strongly contribute to the development of altitude sickness alcohol, violation of the regime of work and rest, fatigue at work, illness.       III. Treatment of altitude sickness      The main remedy for the treatment of altitude sickness is to restore the oxygen supply of the body as soon as possible (to descend from a height, breathe in oxygen or an oxygen-air mixture, carbogen). It happens that in some people, at the beginning of oxygen breathing, the condition may deteriorate sharply for a short time - for a few seconds.      This condition is called oxygen paradox, accompanied by convulsions and loss of consciousness. In this case, it is necessary to start symptomatic treatment and hyperbaric oxygenation.      IV. Prevention of altitude sickness      In order to protect yourself from altitude sickness, technical means are used that compensate for falls (hermetic cabins, oxygen-respiratory equipment, high-altitude equipment, etc.      To prevent altitude sickness, you must first go through altitude adaptation and take medicines (bemitil), which increase the body's resistance to altitude conditions.