What is altitude sickness that mourns the climbing season on Mount Everest?
Drafting
BBC Mundo
May 23, 2016
Share this update on Facebook Share this update on Twitter Share this update on Messenger Share this update on Email Share
Image copyrightAP
image caption
Although Mount Everest is more than 8,000 meters above sea level, symptoms of altitude sickness can be felt from 2,500 meters.
It is not necessary to climb the more than 8,000 meters of Mount Everest to suffer from the so-called mountain sickness or altitude sickness, but the seriousness of this disorder was evident in the ascent to the highest peak in the world.

In recent days, three climbers have lost their lives, two others have disappeared and about 30 have become ill in the Himalayas after suffering, it is believed, its effects.

Tragedy on Everest: 3 dead climbers, 2 missing and 30 sick
Dutchman Eric Ary Arnold, 36, lost his life on Friday after reaching the top of the mountain, Australian Maria Strydom, 34, died on Saturday while descending from the summit and Indian climber Subhash Paul died Monday.

Image copyrightEPA
image caption
A Sherpa shows the point where two of the climbers died while descending after conquering the summit of Everest.
Mountain sickness, also known as soroche, puna, or apunamiento in South America, occurs when people have trouble adjusting to low oxygen levels at high altitudes .

In most cases they experience mild dizziness and headaches, although they can also suffer from nausea, vomiting, exhaustion and sleep disorders.

But there are situations where it is fatal. For example, when excess fluid builds up in the brain and lungs.

Chances of having the disorder
Anyone can be exposed to mountain sickness if they ascend to a place that is above 2,500 meters above sea level, although it has been claimed that people living in Tibet have a gene that allows them to counteract the effects of high altitudes.

Image copyrightGETTY
image caption
To prevent altitude sickness, mountaineers usually spend some acclimatization time in the different camps that are on the ascent route.
30% of people experience some of the symptoms in a moderate way, but between 1% and 3% suffer the most severe effects, a situation that often occurs on Everest.

Develop test to predict mountain sickness
If you begin to suffer from altitude sickness, the recommendation is to descend to a lower elevation and drink plenty of fluids and, if possible, receive oxygen.

It is possible to try to prevent its appearance with a slow and progressive acclimatization , so that the body gradually gets used to the lack of oxygen.

Image copyrightAFP
image caption
Since last May 11 almost 400 climbers have managed to reach the top of Everest.
It can also be achieved with medication, but for this you must consult a doctor, in order to avoid side effects.

Viagra, aspirin and other secrets to play soccer in the heights of Bolivia
The climbers' deaths were the first in the current Mount Everest climbing season, which as the first period to open since the Nepal earthquake, has attracted many climbers.

Almost 400 people have reached the top since last May 11, benefiting from the good conditions present in the ascent on the Nepalese side.