The US space program is "losing momentum" Between 1964 and 1966, NASA stopped growing both in numbers and financially. While Webb's relationship with Kennedy was fairly frank and benevolent, the relationship between the head of NASA and the new president, Lyndon Johnson, was much more complicated. Both were about the same age (in 1963 Webb was 57 and Johnson was 55). Webb had as much direct access to Johnson as to Kennedy. Moreover, the head of the agency sometimes had more understanding with the new president than with his predecessor. The explanation was simple - after all, Johnson was personally responsible for the success of the Apollo program. But on a personal level, neither one nor the other became close people. The reason is also quite simple. Both understood that the "honeymoon" of Apollo, when the program enjoyed the unconditional support of legislators and voters, was over. And if Webb's task was to maintain the highest possible level of funding for both this program and other NASA projects, then Johnson had to balance between space exploration and other priorities of US domestic and foreign policy. And there were many such priorities, reflecting the needs of the American nation at that time. What was even worth the program of the so-called "Great Society", the construction of which Johnson, now president without the prefix vice, made one of the goals of his reign. It included a radical expansion of civil rights and freedoms, tax cuts to stimulate the economy, a multi-billion dollar anti-poverty program, federal assistance to all aspects of the education system, and an increase in social security benefits, including the provision of medical services to the elderly[625] . All this meant that the Webb agency, from Johnson's favorite "child", formally became for the new president the same contender for the budget "pie" as, for example, the Department of Energy or Agriculture. And now he, Johnson, one of the main distributors of this "pie", will have to balance the appetites of NASA with concern for the "food" of other departments. Thus, the new head of the White House, although he retained sympathy for NASA, nevertheless, from the unconditional "guardian" of the agency, became a certain deterrent to the ambitions of Webb and his organization. However, at the very beginning of his presidency, Johnson, having committed himself to fulfilling what his deceased predecessor had set out to do, emphasized his intention to lead the Apollo program to success. Inspired by the new President's impulse, Webb, in one of his first conversations with him, expressed his concern about NASA's 1963 budget cuts. This could call into question the landing of the Americans on the moon as scheduled by Kennedy. The head of NASA and the president decided to ask Congress to "throw" funds into the agency this year, and in the future - to increase the "purse" of Webb's department. As a result, Johnson approved the allocation of funds to the NASA budget in 1965 in the amount of 5.25 billion dollars. As for the current year, 1964, NASA received an additional $72.5 million, $150 million more than in the previous year[626]. Encouraged by Johnson's attentive attitude to the needs and concerns of the agency, Webb began to help the new president in areas atypical for the head of NASA. So, in particular, he became an ardent supporter of the proposed civil rights act by Johnson and, moreover, began to use his connections and influence to speed up the adoption of this document by Congress. Being himself a politician from the South, Webb repeatedly spoke with senators from the southern states - opponents of the presidential initiative, urging them to support the bill. This civil rights act was aimed at combating the segregation of the black population in the United States. It prohibited any form of discrimination in voting, education, and in public places. For the first time since 1954, when the US Supreme Court desegregated public schools, the central government had a real tool to enforce that ruling. Paragraph VI of the document prohibited the use of federal funds to finance schools where segregation was practiced. Alabama was considered one of the most problematic states in terms of maintaining inequality between white and black populations. Here, Webb could play, perhaps, his main "trump card", because the Marshall Space Flight Center was located on the territory of the state - the patrimony of von Braun himself. Needless to say, the presence of such an organization in Alabama was a great pride of the state. So, Webb arrived in Alabama and said that the policy of the state authorities, if not promoting, then at least not preventing the presence of discrimination in its territory, does not give NASA the opportunity to recruit "the best of the best" into its ranks there. As a result, the agency's management will have to find another, more "philanthropic" place for the center. And then there's the representative of Louisiana publicly under reiterated the interest of the authorities of this state in placing von Braun's estate on its territory, if it still had to be "evacuated" from Alabama[627]. It is difficult to say to what extent such pressure could force the government of Alabama to reconsider its "behavior" in relation to the black minority, but the "fathers" of the state could hardly ignore such signals of dissatisfaction with their policies. When Johnson defeated the Republican nominee for President Barry Goldwater rather easily in 1964, Webb suggested that the head of the White House would continue to support NASA and the Apollo program in particular with unfailing enthusiasm. The head of the agency needed such support also because of the “surprises” that the Rangers, unmanned vehicles designed to study the lunar surface in order to determine suitable places for future Apollo landings, presented him with enviable regularity. In January 1964, the Ranger's sixth consecutive accident caused Congress to raise its eyebrows in surprise - what's the problem? In engineering design errors, in insufficient quality of work of the industry, or maybe in NASA management? Luckily for Webb, this time he didn't have to use Johnson's "heavy artillery" to defend himself against Congress. In July 1964, Ranger 7 "worked out" for all its unsuccessful predecessors, flawlessly completing the flight program and delivering excellent pictures of the surface of Selena to Earth. Overall, 1964 was a pretty good year for NASA and Webb. In America, the Gemini manned program, the immediate predecessor and harbinger of the Apollo, was in full swing. The success of "Gemini" certainly played into the hands of Johnson. It was a time when his "Vietnamese" policy began to come under increasing criticism both inside and outside the country. The president needed something that could make his image in the eyes of the world community more peaceful and progressive. The Gemini astronauts, who carried out unprecedented dockings and "walks" in space, came in handy here. Johnson wished to see them as his ambassadors of "goodwill" at various international forums and events. Webb was not enthusiastic about the President's intention. He had nothing against the fact that the head of the White House tirelessly repeated about the exploration of space by the United States "for peaceful purposes", but he did not approve of Johnson's plan to use his subordinates as politicians. Apparently, the memories of how he had to "put in place" the astronauts, who imagined themselves to be figures of a national scale, were still too fresh in Webb's memory for him to unwittingly contribute to the aggravation of the "star" illness of the wards, giving them the status of "ambassadors of peace and friendship" . A dispute on this topic between the head of NASA and the president flared up at Johnson's ranch in Texas. The Russians, as it became known to the head of the White House, were going to send Yuri Gagarin to the upcoming air show in Paris. Johnson began to insist that the astronauts who were supposed to fly into space on the nearest Gemini should go there too. He did not want to hear any objections from Webb. In an effort to demonstrate to the head of NASA that this is a settled issue, the president took out a prepared press release on this event and began to read it. Webb interrupted Johnson, noting that one should not talk about the upcoming flight as if it had already been successfully completed. No one can guarantee its 100% success. Not at all embarrassed, Johnson changed the beginning of the press release, which now sounded like this: “After the most unsuccessful space launch in history ...” and continued to read the previously written text. The head of NASA had no choice but to surrender. True, he did not dare to leave the crew of Gemini 4 safely returned from space in Paris “unattended”, and therefore he himself went to the French capital together with two astronauts[628]. In general, Webb was well aware of the political importance for the president of American space achievements. For example, he made sure that the announcement of the forthcoming docking in space of two Geminis was made from the residence of the Governor of Texas - Johnson's home state and the "launching pad" of his political career[629]. By mid-November 1966, by the time the last Gemini 12 returned from space, the president was already basking in the glory of the organizer of American space "victories", declaring that the United States had finally caught up with the Russians and more — rush forward[630]. The Gemini program was not only brilliantly executed, but more than that, it was completed ahead of schedule. However, "according to tradition", the astronauts in the person of Gordon Cooper asked Webb to add another flight. The response from the NASA administrator was unequivocal: “We are concentrating [all efforts] on Apollo. We don't need Gemini anymore." In general, everything looked pretty good on the surface: the space program is moving forward "at full throttle", ruled by a skilled leader who enjoys the full patronage of the head of state. However, if it seemed to those who learned about US space achievements from the newspapers that America's ascent to the stars would continue at an unchanged pace, then people directly involved in the process knew that this was far from being the case. The future of the United States in space, at least as Webb envisioned it, rested on two "pillars": one was the "University Support Program" (PSP for short) and the other was the successor to Apollo. ". Somewhere before 1965, it seemed to the head of NASA that these “pillars” were standing on a “rock”: the first was understanding from the academic community, and the second was presidential support for space activities and a benevolent attitude towards it from Congress. Time has shown, however, that this "rocky soil" turned out to be quicksand. PRP was conceived by Webb back in 1961. As a staunch supporter of space exploration, the NASA administrator nevertheless lived by the principle "space for Earth" and not "Earth for space." In a memorandum to President Johnson in November 1964, the head of the agency wrote that he knew “... no other area where an inspired desire to do everything as it should be in a great society would rely on such proven competence and promise such practical benefits as in within the space program... The space program is where you start building a great society, for it is a truly creative program based on new ideas and new possibilities.”[632] In this slightly pathetic address to the President, Webb made it clear to him that space exploration is the key to the implementation of the White House's earthly plans. Moreover, the head of NASA tried to demonstrate the correctness of this idea with the help of the above-mentioned PRP. Its essence was as follows: to make universities the main tool for using all the achievements of NASA to solve the daily problems of the country or, as some researchers called this intention of Webb, to build "America of the space age." The importance attached by the head of the PSP agency is shown by the fact that, until the mid-1960s, Webb devoted more personal time to this small area of ​​\u200b\u200bhis department than to anything else within NASA, with the exception, of course, of manned flights[633 ]. Of course, the matter was not limited to Webb's calls for universities, using the experience and knowledge of NASA, to develop advanced technologies in which American society and the state experienced the greatest need at that moment. The Agency generously sponsored through grants those institutions that agreed to participate in PSP. Webb was not shy about explaining what to do. The corresponding agreements between NASA and universities were formalized in the form of memorandums of understanding. By 1966, however, it became clear to Webb that his program was not working. As it turned out, university leaders willingly took the agency's money, but, despite the aforementioned memorandums, they did not at all consider themselves obligated to follow NASA's recommendations on which research to spend the funds received. Webb's attempt to harness the "horse" of the state administrative system and the "quivering doe" of traditional university freethinking into one "carriage" ended in failure[634]. "Lan" clearly outweighed the "horse". To this PPU problem was added another one - it was no longer supported by Johnson, who had previously called this program nothing more than a "model" of relations between the government and universities. The President's motives are quite understandable. Indeed, by the mid-1960s, American institutions of higher education had become the main sources of protest against the ongoing US war in Vietnam, and therefore, in many ways, against Johnson himself. In private conversations, the head of the White House often called the participants in student anti-war demonstrations "little bastards." It was, of course, extremely illogical to give state money for the maintenance of these "bastards". Johnson wanted government services, including NASA, to leave this "education business." Webb generally agreed with the president, however, asked that the PPU be canceled not immediately, but over several years, gradually reducing its volume. The "swan song" of the program was the assistance within its framework to colleges where the predominantly black population studied, as well as assistance in the development of public administration as an academic discipline. The PPU was officially closed in 1970[635] The failure of the "University Education Assistance Program" was "bad news" for NASA, but more troubling was something else. As already noted, at first, the leadership of the agency had no reason to worry about the future of the United States in space. Shortly after formally taking office as president, Johnson directed Webb to develop a plan for space activities after the completion of Apollo. However, by 1965, Johnson no longer wanted to hear  about what such a plan and moreover - did not want to bring it to the attention of Congress. Any decisions about the Apollo successor program were shelved by the White House. The only thing that the president has approved for the continuation of manned space flights after the end of the lunar expeditions is the project of the so-called Manned Orbital Laboratory, or POL. This laboratory was to be created under the personal supervision of Secretary of Defense McNamara and was a military version of the Gemini[636]. Now Webb had another headache to make sure that POL did not replace the large near-Earth multi-purpose station that NASA intended to develop. Realizing that Johnson would not support any new agency goal in space as large as Apollo, Webb focused his efforts on the so-called Apollo Applied Recoil Program (APP), which was designed to make the most of technologies developed by the Apollo project to create new, "interim" manned vehicles.The design and production of these samples was supposed to keep the American space industry in "shape" until the US government made another decision to implement the global space program, which could be an expedition to Mars or the construction of a large habitable complex in near-Earth orbit.Looking ahead, I will say that the PPO, albeit in a very truncated form, became the Skylab station, launched into space on May 14, 1973. Skylab operated in manned mode from May 25, 1973 to February 8, 1974. During this time, three crews worked on it, each of which consisted of three people. After the last astronaut left the station, it was switched to automatic flight mode and deorbited on July 11, 1979, waking up in the form of an artificial meteor shower on southwestern Australia. Securing the succession to Apollo was what Webb was doing from 1964 to 1966. In fact, in many ways it was the fate of NASA. In 1965, the agency's budget reached its peak of $5.25 billion (nearly 4% of the national budget), after which it began to gradually decline. And there was no certainty in the question of where and on what to fly after the Apollo. Johnson remained silent. This situation began to create problems for Webb in relations with Congress. Legislators demanded a clear answer from him: what America would do in space after Apollo. “Decisions should be made by the President and Congress, and NASA should only execute them,” the head of the agency weakly tried to fight off such attacks. “Yes, but the ideas on the basis of which these decisions will be made must still come from you,” he was reminded on Capitol Hill. Such accusations of actual inaction were unfair. Webb repeatedly, during personal meetings with Johnson, offered various options for US space policy after the end of the lunar epic. Alas, only for the president to reject them. Webb began to lose patience. In May 1966, he even risked some aggravation of relations with the White House. In an interview with The New York Times, he warned of an impending "crisis in space planning." A decision on a successor to the Apollo program, Webb stressed, must be made within a year, long before the first moon landing. “It is very important to get rid of the idea that this decision can again be postponed. I think it is extremely necessary to organize a serious national debate in order to decide whether we want to pass the point of no return, ”the head of the agency urged voters and politicians. By "point of no return," Webb explained, he meant that only a certain number of Saturn-class launch vehicles and Apollo-class spacecraft were planned to be produced in the United States. As soon as orders for their manufacture are completed, design offices and factory lines will stand up and wait for new orders. That's when this "point" will be passed. This means that some contractors who worked for Apollo will have to lay off their employees. NASA's "flywheel" of the Apollo-powered industry is already beginning to slow down, Webb warned. In July, i.e. a couple of months after this interview, the aerospace industry will be forced to lay off work from 40,000 to 60,000 specialists[637]. Not limited to statements on the pages of the press, the head of the agency spoke across the country to all sorts of influential people. During these speeches, he tried to convey to the audience the main idea - do not think that the "lunar race" has already been won, while the Soviet Union demonstrates the ability to put into orbit loads of greater weight than the United States. According to Webb, at least a year or two will pass before the United States catches up with the USSR in terms of carrying capacity and reliability of carriers. In the meantime, the Soviets are “certainly ahead of us, not only in the field of manned flight around the moon, but, quite in perhaps also in the area of ​​landing on the moon”[638]. However, Webb's calls and warnings did not always resonate with his listeners. The real “cold shower” for the NASA administrator was the reaction he received to his speech from the mayors during a meeting with them at a meeting of the National League of US Cities. The heads of the municipalities were not enthusiastic about the achievements of the agency, nor did they want to hear anything about America's "post-Apollo" plans. The only thing they sought was the adoption of a resolution on the allocation of additional funds to the city budgets. Webb was literally shocked at the extent to which the "fathers of the cities" made NASA the "scapegoat" of problems, primarily financial, that stood in the way of building a "great society." The Apollo against the backdrop of the city's slums was the picture that angry mayors painted to illustrate their idea of ​​violating the principle of prioritizing national priorities. At this meeting, like on a battlefield, two different types of values ​​clashed: on the one hand, ideological, associated with the use of the space program to assert America's status as a world superpower, and on the other, "utilitarian and everyday", caused by the need to raise the standard of living ordinary Americans. For the head of NASA, for whom the first was inextricably linked with the second, such a confrontation was an unexpected and rather severe blow[639]. Did not make life easier for Webb in 1965-1966. and Budget Director Charles Schulze. The Vietnam War was becoming an increasingly heavy burden on the US national budget, and Johnson gave Schultze even greater authority to protect America's public "purse" from the "encroachment" of agencies not directly connected with the campaign in Southeast Asia. NASA was one of the latter. Schulze remained indifferent to Webb's worries about possible layoffs from the space industry, reminding him that the space program is not an employment agency. However, by mid-December 1966, the White House's chief "state employee" agreed with the head of the agency that postponing further a decision on the Apollo successor program would inevitably cause a break in the United States' extra-atmospheric manned activities. Although they still cited different amounts to ensure this succession, Webb guessed that Johnson would prefer the minimum figure indicated by Schulze[640]. The year 1966 ended. The NASA administrator saw that the national consensus that was once a stronghold for NASA and the Apollo program was slowly disappearing. The successes of the Gemini, contrary to expectations, did not charge America with even greater “space” enthusiasm, did not force it to rush from the “dusty paths” of the Moon to the red plains of Mars or, at worst, build a large habitable complex in Earth orbit. On the contrary, as the United States pulled ahead in the space "race", the society and politicians of this country were increasingly embraced by complacency and complacency. They were increasingly visited by the thought: is it necessary to tear the federal budget, spending billions on a lunar expedition, when America, in general, has already proved its superiority in space? Fearing that the president shared similar sentiments, the head of the agency reminded him of how, in 1961, he had practically forced him, Webb, to recommend the Apollo program to Kennedy. However, Johnson did not abandon the Apollo. He simply did not support the plans of the NASA administrator to develop the US exatmospheric activities after the completion of the expeditions to the moon, but this "just" was fatal to the future of the American space program. Thus, Webb, like Themis, could sum up the three years (from the beginning of 1964 to the end of 1966) after the death of Kennedy and the assumption of the presidency with the help of scales. On one bowl, he would put the overall pace of implementation of the Apollo, taken at the start of the "moon race", preserved as a whole. I would also add the success of the Gemini program, which became the most important step towards the main goal - landing on Selena. On the other side of the scale, however, would be NASA's budget cuts, the phasing out of the University Support Program, and a delay in making decisions about America's "post-Apollo" future in space. The head of NASA, probably, himself could not say which of the two bowls would be heavier[642]. 1967 got off to a pretty good start for the Apollo program, NASA, and Webb. Preparations for the first manned Apollo launch went according to schedule. In addition, the head of the agency finally managed to convince the president that if the White House does not immediately decide on the future of the American space program, then this program will migrate to the history books immediately after the expedition to the moon is completed. Johnson heeded Webb's warnings and instructed him to include $454.7 million for the Apollo Applied Recoil Program in NASA's 1968 budget request. According to the New York Times, NASA plans for space exploration The wasp after the end of Apollo included expeditions to Selene lasting up to two weeks, as well as flights to near-Earth orbit lasting up to a year. The requested funds were to be used for the development and construction of new launch vehicles and ships, as well as for the modification of existing equipment[643]. Everyone working in the US space industry has a feeling: at least for the near future of NASA, you can not worry. On January 27, this impression was dealt a tangible blow. That day, astronauts Grissom, White, and Chaffee took their seats at 1:00 p.m. on the Apollo Command Module atop the Saturn 1B launch vehicle. There was the usual preparation for the upcoming start in a little over three weeks. According to the plan, they were supposed to leave on February 21 for a two-week flight in earth orbit. At 18:31, ten minutes before the simulated launch of the launch vehicle at the end of training, a fire broke out in the Apollo's cockpit. Crew members died literally within seconds from suffocation from poisonous gases formed as a result of the combustion of the interior materials of the Apollo capsule. Even though President Johnson, Vice President Humphrey, Senator Anderson, and George Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Space, issued statements that despite this tragedy, the Apollo program must continue,[644] it was clear— critics of "Apollo" will not be long in coming. Indeed, first the media, and then some NASA engineers, began to say that the rush to implement the lunar program forced the agency to "cut corners" in matters of crew safety. A special committee was set up to look into the causes of the accident. It included 15 people, including representatives of NASA, the Air Force, as well as academia not directly associated with the lunar program. The committee worked for ten weeks. The end product of his $4 million effort was a 3,000 page report. The members of the committee did not spare either NASA or one of the main contractors of this department - the company "North American". It was she who carried out the development and construction of the Apollo spacecraft, including its command module, where the fire occurred. The report explicitly spoke of the responsibility that the agency and North American bore for "numerous omissions" in the design and manufacture of the ship. In fairness, it should be noted that the authors of the document could not accurately indicate the main cause of the tragedy and limited themselves to listing the conditions that could lead to it: a pressurized cabin pressurized with pure oxygen; a large amount of flammable material distributed throughout the cabin; vulnerable ship wiring; a vulnerable system of pipelines through which a flammable and aggressive coolant is supplied; inefficient system of emergency escape by the crew of the ship; an inefficient system for rescuing the crew or providing them with medical care[645]. The document also contained a number of recommendations to improve the safety of Apollo. This report added "oil to the fire" of criticism that the American media brought down on the "head" of the US space program. Characteristic in this regard was an editorial published in the New York Times. The true cause of the death of the crew, according to the newspaper, was "the completely irrational image of the space program in the eyes of society, with its technically unsound and, as the Apollo tragedy showed, an extremely dangerous commitment to the meaningless date of landing a man on the moon by 1970." "In the name of a politically driven schedule," The Times claimed, "they took enormous risks that cost the lives of astronauts Grissom, White, and Chaffee." The newspaper demanded that "NASA's future policy under new leadership be determined by ... safety, not public relations." The allusion to "new leadership" was very transparent - Webb must go[646]. It is quite possible that the NASA administrator would have had to do this if he had not taken a number of drastic measures aimed at correcting the situation. Webb acknowledged: "The fire showed that a number of items relating to the design and functioning of the [ship's] environment will require the most careful consideration and possibly rework."[647] However, the head of the agency began "from himself", or rather from his own department. His internal reorganization of NASA was aimed at strengthening the control of the agency's management over the activities of contractors, as well as improving the effectiveness of communication between the lower and upper echelons of the NASA hierarchy. The second most important step was to involve Boeing in additional control over the work of North American. The fact is that Boeing has already acted as a contractor for NASA, developing one of the three stages of Saturn by order of this department, and is also responsible for linking these stages into one. So why not expand the powers of the Boeing, entrusting it with the integration of the launch vehicle and the ship? This move would effectively turn the Boeing into another "caretaker" for  the quality of North American products, as well as other contractors. And so it was done[648]. Two more events contributed to the exit of the American space program from the state of "stopper" in which it found itself after the fire on Apollo 1. One of them, sad, happened in the Soviet Union. On April 23, 1967, cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov died during the landing of the Soyuz-1 spacecraft. The news of this tragic incident not only confirmed that the USSR continued to participate in the “lunar race”, but also reminded that space exploration is a dangerous business, and not only America is the lot to pay for with human lives[649]. The second event was positive. On November 29, 1967, the unmanned Apollo 4 went into space. The first test of the carrier "Saturn-5" ended in complete success. But a week before this event, NASA published the Apollo flight plan, according to which American astronauts were supposed to set foot on the Moon no later than the end of 1969. The plan surprised many: its implementation on schedule was possible only on the condition that all flights without exception "Apollo" over the next two years will be successful. It is difficult to say what was more in the document - Webb's true faith in the reliability of technology, or his desire to "infect" ordinary Americans and politicians with such faith, thereby restoring their support for the lunar program. If the second assumption is true, then the head of the agency has achieved its goal. On January 30, 1968, a little less than three months after the announcement of this plan, the US Senate Space Committee released a report containing the main results of the parliamentary investigation into the Apollo 1 fire. The authors of the document, although they expressed some criticism of NASA, did not see a connection between the tragedy and the haste with which the Apollo program was carried out. Moreover, the first of the committee's recommendations was to call on NASA to continue implementing this program in order to achieve its goals[650]. Despite such a promising start, 1968 brought the NASA administrator perhaps as much headache as the previous one. True, no one, thank God, was killed or injured, but what began to happen both inside and outside the United States increasingly pushed the manned expedition to Selena to the bottom of the list of America's national priorities. Domestic political events unfavorable to Apollo included the assassinations of black minority civil rights activist Martin Luther King and John F. Kennedy's brother, Robert, one of the likely candidates for the presidency of the United States. To this should be added the wave of Negro protests that swept American cities after King's assassination. Finally, Johnson, one of the most consistent and active supporters of the activities of the United States outside the atmosphere, decided not to be re-elected for another term. As for what was happening outside the country, it was the deteriorating US military situation in Vietnam, as well as the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia. All these events diverted the attention of society and politicians, and hence the funds from the federal budget, from the space program. This became apparent in NASA's 1969 budget request. If the Apollo project received the required "nutrition", then the "Apollo Practical Return Program" was translated into "starvation rations". It was requested $ 439 million - about half of what was going to be spent in 1968[651]. In part this situation was due to Congress making federal spending cuts a top financial priority in 1968. In contrast to the early 1960s, when many of the members of the upper and lower houses made political capital by supporting America's great lunar throw , the legislators of the end of this decade saw political gain in curtailing the US space program: "How can we afford to spend so much on something that is not directly related to solving our country's most pressing internal and external problems?" was the question underlying their new, "realistic" attitude towards the activities of the United States in space. Such "realism" was quite in line with the mood of the voters. By the summer of 1965, a third of Americans polled were in favor of reducing spending on space, while only 16% for their increase Over the next three and a half years, the number of people who wanted to reduce the NASA budget rose to 40%, and the number of those who proposed to increase it fell to 14%.A poll conducted in the summer of 1969 showed that 53% of Americans were against manned flight to Mars[652]. PPO was one of the most "easily hit" targets. Indeed, why spend money on what, in general, duplicates the "Manned Orbital Laboratory" created by the military? Webb called the spring of 1968 the time when " NASA was losing congressional support en masse.” In June of this year, NASA's budget was slashed to $4 billion, of which only $25 was earmarked for PES.  3 million. At the same time, Johnson warned Webb about the upcoming new withdrawals of funds from the agency's "purse". This meant that the conveyor from which the Saturns were leaving would be stopped. Von Braun and a number of other high-ranking NASA officials urged the head of the agency to reserve at least one Saturn-5 for PPO, capable of launching a heavy station "stuffed" with everything necessary on Earth into orbit. Otherwise, a smaller carrier would have to be used to launch this station into low Earth orbit, and then retrofit the complex in flight. Webb opposed such a proposal. He had a hard time convincing Congress and the White House budget department that the Apollo program would need at least 15 Saturn V-type launchers, and he is not going to question this figure by transferring at least one launch vehicle to the "post-Apollo" space station. Then he was repeatedly criticized for allegedly insufficient consistency in upholding the PPO. But the head of the agency knew that in 1968 he no longer had the funds or the political backing to justify in the eyes of taxpayers, legislators, and the White House the need for both the lunar program and its successor. Any attempt to secure America's future in space could lead to a political devaluation of its current space activities, which could already jeopardize Apollo[653]. On October 7, 1968, two and a half months before the first Apollo 8 flyby of Selena, James Webb resigned. He lived a long life. The former NASA administrator passed away at the age of 85 on March 27, 1992, exactly on the 34th anniversary of Gagarin's death. He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery - one of the highest honors given to those who have exceptional service to the American nation. Here is what President George W. Bush wrote about him to his widow: “He will forever be remembered as the man who led the newly formed space agency to its greatest success in the 1960s, culminating in the historic steps of an American astronaut on the moon. This single event is one of the moments [in the history] of the country that it is most proud of. It has become one of the greatest scientific, engineering, and managerial achievements of the 20th century. This success is a great tribute to Jim's leadership at NASA. The people of America will always be grateful to him for the inexhaustible contribution that he made to our nation, and, in general, to the [development] of all mankind. Formally, Webb ceased to be responsible for US civilian space activities at the end of 1968. All subsequent metamorphoses began to occur with her already under his successors. But it is not difficult to imagine what was going on in the soul of one of the main creators of American space triumphs when he saw how, in the early 1970s, the United States canceled five expeditions to the Moon, and then a second Skylab station[655]. e-reading.club 