Toshka-dotoshka, solved 11 years ago
what is the difference between a tornado and a tornado?
eleven
best answer
V and hr, 11 years ago
Higher intelligence
Hello!
This natural phenomenon is called SMERCH in Russian and TORNADO in English.
And naturally, therefore, "tornadoes" are observed in America, and "tornadoes" - in Russia, Ukraine, etc., but this is the SAME NATURAL PHENOMENON!
It's just that our journalists "lay" under the English language and when they see a tornado in America in the video, they give the word "tornado" without translation, and when it comes to Russia (Ukraine, Belarus, ...) they remember the word SMERCH. And tornadoes arise over any surfaces (sea, land ...) and it depends on the atmospheric process.
And now about this natural phenomenon itself.
This is one of the types of vortices in the atmosphere, see more details:
http://answer.mail.ru/question/31523123/
Small-scale whirlwinds ("thickness" of several hundred meters, height up to km) - TWORKS (called "tornadoes" in America), caused by. a sharp rise in sections of air upwards (“breaks”) with a strong vertical instability of the atmosphere, with a “twist” of rising air masses. In the middle of this rotating vertical vortex, due to centrifugal force, an air rarefaction arises, which acts as a "vacuum bomb", destroying the structure "from the inside".
Tornadoes - extremely dangerous, they often cause destruction of buildings, death of people .... due to high rotation speeds (and in different directions!) and discharge in the center.
Tornadoes and their "consequences of activity" are often shown on TV.
For example, a tornado was observed in Sochi (see fig. top), and when transferring this picture to America, they will write the word "Tornado" about THIS SAME phenomenon. With information about a tornado from the south coast from France (fig. bottom), they write of course - "tornado" . And this is the same natural phenomenon!
And tornadoes are arbitrarily found in Russia, I myself saw a powerful dusty tornado in a weather expedition in the summer while still a student in the Orenburg steppe: That day there was a stuffy heat, up to 40 degrees C, several people. (rested after night observations), the rest of the expedition members worked "at points" during the day. I was resting in a tent after lunch, and suddenly I was awakened by a powerful and eerie loud roar, similar to the noise of a powerful jet engine, and I jumped out of the tent to see "what is it? " also did everyone who was in the tents. We saw that a high dust whirlwind was spinning 2-3 km south of us, going into the sky and making a "roar" - it was a powerful tornado. At a height in a column of dust whole trees were spinning, some objects (as it turned out, the roofs of houses from a neighboring village). We stood with our mouths open, and then the leader of the expedition ran out and yelled - everyone into the pit! Behind the tents there was a 4th depth covered trench for observing the temperature of the soil at depths and we all ran to the pit. A column of dust occupied half the sky and the roar intensified, the tornado was clearly going "at us". And then - that's happiness, the tornado "turned" past us to the right and went into the steppe, lightning struck and thunder struck and there was a very heavy downpour. We were lucky, and we joked that the tornado "pityed its" meteorologists, otherwise it would have tore off all the tents! It is a pity that the photo did not turn out due to heavy dust. And then we waited with apprehension for the return of those who had left on a "gazik" to observe in the steppe - just in the direction where the tornado "left" (there were no cell phones then). And fortunately, they arrived almost at midnight, wet and tired, and all whole, they say that they got stuck many times on the road soaked with rain and could not quickly get there and the tornado "felt sorry" for them - it passed by! !
All the best, and do not get into a tornado (in Russia) and a tornado (in America) - a terrible force!

Source: Meteorology (Atmospheric Physics)
See 7 more answers
Andrey Aliev, 11 years ago
Sage
A tornado is a strong wind, and a tornado is a spiral whirlwind

I'm saving up for a Maserati!, 11 years ago
Thinker
Place of residence - in America it is a tornado, in our country - a tornado.
Professional, 11 years ago
Thinker
only by name, we have a tornado, in the USA - a tornado
SS, 11 years ago
Guru
A whirlwind formed on the sea is called a tornado, and on land - a tornado!
Source: But more often all these concepts are considered as synonyms.
Don't Shoot White Horses 11 years ago
Master
Producer country
Oksana Borovskaya, 11 years ago
Connoisseur
This is the same. A tornado, tornado, thrombus is an atmospheric vortex that occurs in a cumulonimbus (thunderstorm) cloud and spreads down, often to the very surface of the earth, in the form of a cloud sleeve or trunk with a diameter of tens and hundreds of meters
Alexander Shakhnovich, 11 years ago
Connoisseur
This is the same