Tornado is a terrible phenomenon of nature
Published by Sidorova Natalia Vitalievna on 25.12.2012 - 20:20
Sidorova Natalia Vitalievna
AUTHOR:
Barabanova Alexandra
Presentation about a formidable phenomenon of nature - a tornado (tornado)

Download:
Package icon smerchi_i_tornado.zip 630.72 KB

Slides captions:

If the size of the vortex is not so big
,
he gives birth to a tornado - a whirlwind that captures the space under the cloud
,
that spews streaks of rain.

Tornadoes are one of the most amazing phenomena of nature, still causing great controversy. The reasons for their formation are especially unclear. A tornado or tornado is usually part of a thundercloud.
Its most important property is the rapid rotation of rain jets around a vertical axis. This phenomenon is called in physics a vortex.

Typhoon is a Chinese word that translates as "the wind that beats."
Hurricane is an English word transliterated into Russian
hurricane
.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR ATTENTION
!
TORNADO
-

TERRIBLE PHENOMENON

NATURE






The form of tornadoes can be diverse - a column, a cone, a glass, a barrel, a whip-like rope, an hourglass, the horns of the "devil", etc., but most often tornadoes have the form of a rotating trunk, pipe or funnel hanging from the parent cloud


Rotation in tornadoes is counterclockwise,
as in the cyclones of the northern hemisphere of the Earth.

Tornadoes and other stormy weather phenomena are very dangerous. Therefore, if a strong wind rises, it is better to take shelter in strong buildings. If the tornado is very powerful, the place in the room must be chosen so that breaking glass from windows and falling objects do not harm you. If you happen to be outdoors, stay away from
trees and
other tall objects that may fall.

V
Earth's atmosphere is subject to counter currents of air (winds)
,
which are twisted
,
creating vortices.
Visible from space
,
how the spiral of clouds converges towards the center.
And under these clouds - the ocean
,
where the storm is raging.

People still can not prevent the formation of a tornado
,
but they know the reason
,
through which tornadoes become powerful.
Therefore, you need to know the rules of behavior and protection
,
if near a tornado arose.

The energy of a typical tornado is equal to that of a reference atomic bomb of 20 kilotons of TNT, similar to the first atomic bomb detonated in the United States.

jets of rain
,
revolving
,
form a funnel.
This funnel descends to the ground.
The speed of the air in it is enormous and causes great destruction on the ground.
Quite large objects are often sucked into the funnel.