natural phenomena. Natural and dangerous natural phenomena
News and Society NatureAv. Xenia South
June 26, 2014
SubscribeShareRecommend
Natural phenomena are ordinary, sometimes even supernatural climatic and meteorological events that occur naturally in all corners of the planet. It can be snow or rain familiar from childhood, or it can be incredible destructive volcanic eruptions or earthquakes. If such events take place away from a person and do not cause him material damage, they are considered unimportant. No one will draw attention to this. Otherwise, dangerous natural phenomena are considered by mankind as natural disasters. Hazardous natural phenomena

Research and observation
People began to study characteristic natural phenomena in ancient times. However, it was possible to systematize these observations only in the 17th century, even a separate section of science (natural science) was formed that studies these events. However, despite many scientific discoveries, to this day, some natural phenomena and processes remain poorly understood. Most often, we see the consequence of an event, and we can only guess about the root causes and build various theories. Researchers in many countries are working on forecasting the occurrence, and most importantly, preventing their possible occurrence or at least reducing the damage caused by natural phenomena. And yet, despite all the destructive power of such processes, a person always remains a person and strives to find something beautiful, sublime in this. What natural phenomenon is the most fascinating? They can be listed for a long time, but, probably, such as a volcanic eruption, a tornado, a tsunami should be noted - they are all beautiful, despite the destruction and chaos that remain after them. natural phenomena

Weather phenomena of nature
Natural phenomena characterize the weather with its seasonal changes. Each season has its own set of events. So, for example, the following weather phenomena are observed in spring: snowmelt, flood, thunderstorms, clouds, wind, rain. In summer, the sun gives the planet an abundance of heat, natural processes at this time are most favorable: clouds, warm wind, rain and, of course, a rainbow; but can also be severe: thunderstorms, hail. In autumn, the weather conditions change, the temperature drops, the days become cloudy, with rain. During this period, the following phenomena prevail: fogs, leaf fall, hoarfrost, first snow. In winter, the plant world falls asleep, some animals hibernate. The most frequent natural phenomena are: freezing, snowstorm, blizzard, snow, frosty patterns appear on the windows.

All these events are ordinary for us, we have not paid attention to them for a long time. Now let's look at the processes that remind humanity that it is not the crown of everything, and the planet Earth just sheltered it for a while.

Dangerous natural phenomena
These are extreme and severe climatic and meteorological processes that occur in all parts of the world, but some regions are considered more vulnerable to certain types of events than others. Hazardous natural phenomena become disasters when infrastructure is destroyed and people die. These losses represent major obstacles to human development. It is practically impossible to prevent such cataclysms; all that remains is timely forecasting of events in order to prevent casualties and material damage.

However, the difficulty lies in the fact that dangerous natural phenomena can take place on different scales and at different times. In fact, each of them is unique in its own way, and therefore it is very difficult to predict it. For example, flash floods and tornadoes are destructive but short-lived events affecting relatively small areas. Other dangerous disasters, such as droughts, can develop very slowly, but affect entire continents and entire populations. Such disasters last for several months, and sometimes even years. In order to control and predict these events, some national hydrological and meteorological services and special specialized centers are entrusted with the task of studying hazardous geophysical phenomena. This includes volcanic eruptions, airborne ash, tsunamis, radioactive, biological, chemical pollution, etc.

Now let's take a closer look at some natural phenomena. What is a natural phenomenon

Drought
The main reason for this cataclysm is the lack of rainfall. Drought is very different from other natural disasters in its slow development, often hidden by various factors. There are even recorded cases in world history when this disaster lasted for many years. Drought often has devastating consequences: First, water sources (streams, rivers, lakes, springs) dry up, many crops stop growing, then animals die, and ill health and malnutrition become widespread.

Tropical cyclones
These natural phenomena are areas of very low atmospheric pressure over subtropical and tropical waters, forming a colossal rotating system of thunderstorms and winds hundreds (sometimes thousands) of kilometers across. The speed of surface winds in the zone of a tropical cyclone can reach two hundred kilometers per hour or even more. The interaction of low pressure and wind-driven waves often results in a coastal storm surge - a huge volume of water washed ashore with tremendous force and high speed, which washes everything in its path. Characteristic natural phenomena

Air pollution
These natural phenomena arise as a result of the accumulation in the air of harmful gases or particles of substances resulting from cataclysms (volcanic eruptions, fires) and human activities (the work of industrial enterprises, vehicles, etc.). Haze and smoke come from fires on undeveloped lands and forest areas, as well as burning the remains of crops and logging; in addition, due to the formation of volcanic ash. These atmospheric pollutants have very serious consequences for the human body. As a result of such cataclysms, visibility is reduced, there are interruptions in the operation of road and air transport.

desert locust
Such natural phenomena cause serious damage in Asia, the Middle East, Africa and the southern part of the European continent. When environmental and weather conditions are favorable for the reproduction of these insects, they tend to concentrate in small areas. However, with an increase in the number of locusts, it ceases to be an individual creature and turns into a single living organism. From small groups, huge flocks are formed, moving in search of food. The length of such a jamb can reach tens of kilometers. In a day, he can cover distances of up to two hundred kilometers, sweeping away all vegetation in his path. So, one ton of locusts (this is a small part of the flock) can eat as much food per day as ten elephants or 2500 people eat. These insects pose a threat to millions of pastoralists and farmers living in vulnerable environmental conditions. Natural phenomena and processes

Flash floods and flash floods
These natural phenomena of nature can occur anywhere after heavy rainfall. Any flood plains are vulnerable to flooding, and severe storms cause flash floods. In addition, flash floods are sometimes even observed after periods of drought, when very heavy rains fall on a hard and dry surface through which the water flow cannot seep into the ground. These natural events are characterized by a wide variety of types: from violent small floods to a powerful layer of water that covers vast areas. They can be caused by tornadoes, severe thunderstorms, monsoons, extratropical and tropical cyclones (their strength can be increased by the influence of the warm El Niño current), melting snow and ice jams. In coastal areas, storm surges often result in flooding as a result of tsunamis, cyclones or rising river levels due to unusually high tides. The reason for the flooding of vast territories below the barrier dams is often the flood on the rivers, which is caused by melting snow. Natural phenomena of nature

Other natural hazards
1. Debris (mud) flow or landslide.

2. Avalanche.

3. Sand/dust storms.

4. Thunderstorms.

5. Lightning.

6. Extreme temperatures.

7. Tornado.

8. Storms with hail.

9. Freezing rain.

10. Fires on undeveloped lands or in forests.

11. Heavy snow and rain.

12. Strong winds.

13. Heat waves.