What is the difference between a tornado and a tornado? What is stronger - a tornado or a tornado? News and Society EnvironmentAv. Oksana Dubrovskaya December 24, 2014 SubscribeShareTellRecommend Throughout its existence, humanity is constantly faced with such natural phenomena that it is not able to resist. Despite the achieved level of technological progress, humanity is unable to control a tornado, typhoon, tornado. The characteristics of these elements are given below. A tornado is considered one of the most dangerous natural phenomena. It resembles a thundercloud that descended to the surface of the earth for some kind of "dance". Its span is usually up to 400 m, less often it can reach 3000 m. For many, it is a mystery how a tornado differs from a tornado. This is what we have to find out. What is a tornado? A tornado is a huge funnel that descends from a thundercloud to the ground. It can travel both on land and water. The lower part of the funnel resembles a cloud, which consists of dust, dirt, and various objects. Some confuse it with a dusty whirlwind, but this is a serious misconception. The tornado is associated with a thundercloud, it is part of it, resembling a trunk that descended to the ground. He cannot tear himself away from his cloud. And dusty and sandy whirlwinds have nothing to do with thunderstorms. Reasons for the appearance of a tornado Mankind has not yet been able to understand how tornadoes and tornadoes are formed. Their appearance is associated with the process when moist warm air is very close to cold dry air. At the same time, their contact should take place over a cold area of ​​\u200b\u200bland or water. Warm air is between low temperatures. Due to the fact that the process of the appearance of a tornado is a kind of chain reaction, this destructive natural phenomenon is often compared to an atomic bomb. Due to the interaction of cold and warm flows, a trunk is formed, which cools and falls down. Behind it, the rarefaction zone also descends, which draws everything in its path into itself. The danger of a natural phenomenon The whole danger of a tornado lies in its trunk. Depending on its own size, it is able to draw into itself and lift any objects to a great height. They also include people. Dissolving in the atmosphere, it subsides and everything above the ground falls down. If the vortex is unable to pull the object into itself, it tears it apart. For example, a house standing in its way will most likely turn into ruins, and its fragments will scatter for tens of kilometers. What is a tornado? From English and Spanish, the word "tornado" is translated as "to rotate." So in the countries of North America, including the USA, they call a tornado. A spinning funnel descends from a cumulonimbus cloud and makes a sound like a waterfall or a rumbling train. Most often, tornadoes are found in the United States, in the states of Ohio and Texas. This is due to the fact that warm, moist air enters from the Gulf of Mexico, which collides with cold masses from Canada and dry masses from the Rocky Mountains. The following natural phenomena are formed: thunderstorms; showers; heavy winds; tornado. What is the difference between a tornado and a tornado? Many people think that a tornado and a tornado are different phenomena. But if you make out the difference between a tornado and a tornado, it becomes clear that nothing. In some countries, it is generally accepted that a tornado is a destructive phenomenon on land, and a tornado is considered to be on the surface of the water. In addition to these two names, there is a third - a blood clot. It can be heard in European countries. All three names - tornado, tornado, thrombus - are considered to be synonymous. How is a tornado different from a hurricane? Having understood the difference between a tornado and a tornado, you can figure out what a hurricane is. Often people do not understand the features of a particular natural disaster, and everything related to the movement of air masses is called a hurricane. At the same time, a tornado and a hurricane are different concepts. A hurricane is a tropical cyclone, which is expressed in the form of strong winds, heavy rain, thunderstorms. The confusion arises due to the fact that it can cause a subsequent tornado. Classification according to the Fujita scale There can be no answer to the question of what is stronger - a tornado or a tornado, since these are one and the same phenomenon. There are many classifications of his strength, but most often they adhere to the Fujita scale. Tornado, typhoon, tornado: characteristics Code Wind speed, km/h Characteristic 0 116 Relatively little damage is inflicted in the form of broken branches and dilapidated trees. In many countries it is called a storm wind 1 180 The phenomenon is able to tear off the roof from houses, move cars. 2 253 Element uproots trees. 3 332 Thrombus is capable of overturning a train, lifting a car above the ground. 4 418 Everything that is lighter than a car flies in the air, even buildings that are not properly fortified. 5 512 The elements are able to lift almost everything into the air, easily tear off the road surface from the ground. 6-12 over 512 Exists only in theory as the wind can reach the speed of sound. Interesting facts So, we have already figured out what to say about the difference between a tornado and a tornado is not entirely true. Similar phenomena of nature occur all over the world, bringing death and chaos. However, there are cases that can be classified as curious. So, in 1879, a terrible tornado passed through Irving. At this time, parishioners were praying in a wooden church. The clot lifted the church with people inside and moved it several meters. None of them were hurt, escaping with fright. In 1913, in Kansas, the elements walked through the garden, uprooting a large apple tree with roots. It was torn into many pieces, and a beehive with bees standing a meter from the dead tree remained unharmed. In 1940, in the village of Meshchery, along with a thunderstorm, rain fell, consisting, in addition to water, of old coins made of silver under Ivan the Terrible. Such a miracle can be explained by the fact that, having exhausted its energy, the tornado gives up everything that it has drawn into itself. Perhaps he retrieved a treasure that was not buried too deep, but after walking a certain distance, began to weaken and gave it to the ground with rain. In 1923, in Tennessee, the elements destroyed the walls, ceiling and roof of a residential building and carried them up. At the same time, the family that lived in it remained sitting at the table. They all escaped with a fright. In most cases, natural disasters do not bring a person anything but death and destruction. You can verify this by looking at the photos of tornadoes and tornadoes presented in this material. What to do during a tornado? Whatever the difference between a tornado and a tornado, these phenomena are dangerous for humans. To survive, you must adhere to certain recommendations. The first point of any emergency response manual is not to panic and to be collected. First of all, you need to find a secluded place. From a strong tornado, only a special bunker can become it. Do not try to run away from a rapidly approaching blood clot, it will catch up anyway. It is better to orient yourself on the ground and group up so as not to fall into the funnel. It is necessary to find any even a slight depression or gap and squeeze into it as much as possible. So the funnel will not be able to drag it along. At the same time, the head must be covered with hands in order to protect it from being hit by any object that may fly nearby. Being in an ordinary house without a basement, you should follow the instructions: take cover in the center of the room on the ground floor; stay away from windows; close the windows from the side of the approaching elements; open and fix windows on the opposite side; turn off water and electricity; shut off the gas. Manipulations with windows will allow the building not to explode from the pressure drop. - Read more on FB.ru: http://fb.ru:80/article/162336/chem-otlichaetsya-smerch-ot-tornado-chto-silnee---smerch-ili-tornado