Tornadoes       The winds from these natural disasters wreak havoc on whatever they touch.                                    Tornadoes are vertical funnels of rapidly spinning air. Their winds may top 250 miles (400 kilometers) an hour and can clear a pathway a mile (1.6 kilometers) wide and 50 miles (80 kilometers) long.   Twisters are born in thunderstorms and are often accompanied by hail. Giant, persistent thunderstorms called supercells spawn the most destructive tornadoes.   These violent storms occur around the world, but the United States is a major hotspot with about a thousand tornadoes every year.   "Tornado Alley," a region that includes the area in the eastern state of South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, northern Texas, and eastern Colorado, is home to the most powerful and destructive of these storms. U.S. tornadoes cause 80 deaths and more than 1,500 injuries per year.   Tornado Facts     A tornado forms when changes in wind speed and direction create a horizontal spinning effect within a storm cell. This effect is then tipped vertical by rising air moving up through the thunderclouds.  The meteorological factors that drive tornadoes make them more likely at some times than at others. They occur more often in late afternoon, when thunderstorms are common, and are more prevalent in spring and summer. However, tornadoes can and do form at any time of the day and year.  Tornadoes' distinctive funnel clouds are actually transparent. They become visible when water droplets pulled from a storm's moist air condense or when dust and debris are taken up.  Funnels typically grow about 660 feet (200 meters) wide.  Tornadoes move at speeds of about 10 to 20 miles (16 to 32 kilometers) per hour, although they've been clocked in bursts up to 70 miles (113 kilometers) per hour. Most don't get very far, though. They rarely travel more than about six miles (ten kilometers) in their short lifetimes.  Tornadoes are classified as weak, strong, or violent storms. Violent tornadoes comprise only about two percent of all tornadoes, but they cause 70 percent of all tornado deaths and may last an hour or more.  People, cars, and even buildings may be hurled aloft by tornado-force windsor simply blown away. Most injuries and deaths are caused by flying debris.  Tornado forecasters can't provide the same kind of warning that hurricane watchers can, but they can do enough to save lives. Today the average warning time for a tornado alert is 13 minutes. Tornadoes can also be identified by warning signs that include a dark, greenish sky, large hail, and a powerful train-like roar.          What Is a Tornado?         Tornadoes 101  Tornadoes, nearly three-quarters of which occur within the U.S., are unpredictable and can cause massive damage. New tools and data are helping scientists learn more about when they might form and what paths they might take.       A tornado is a violently rotating column of air that extends from a thunderstorm to the ground. It's often portended by a dark, greenish sky. Black storm clouds gather. Baseball-size hail might fall. A funnel suddenly appears, as though descending from a cloud. The funnel hits the ground and roars forward with a sound like that of a freight train approaching. The tornado tears up everything in its path.   Some of Earth's most violent events, nearly a thousand tornadoesmany of them deadlytouch down every year in the United States. Every U.S. state has experienced twisters, but Texas holds the record: an annual average of 120. Tornadoes have been reported in Great Britain, India, Argentina, and other countries, but most tornadoes occur in the United States.      Related Stories              Storm Chaser Video Reveals Devastating Tornadoes    Natures Fury Revealed in These Spellbinding Time-Lapses    Natural Disasters Quiz: Are You a Master of Disasters?         Related to tornadoes, waterspouts are weak twisters that form over warm water. They sometimes move inland and become tornadoes.   Dust devils are small, rapidly rotating columns of air that are made visible by the dust and dirt they pick up. Dust devils are not associated with thunderstorms.   What Causes Tornadoes?   The most violent tornadoes come from supercells, large thunderstorms that have winds already in rotation. About one in a thousand storms becomes a supercell, and one in five or six supercells spawns off a tornado.   Tornado season begins in early spring for the states along the Gulf of Mexico. The season follows the jet streamas it swings farther north, so does tornado activity. May generally has more tornadoes than any other month, but April's twisters are usually more violent.   Although they can occur at any time of the day or night, most tornadoes form in the late afternoon. By this time the sun has heated the ground and the atmosphere enough to produce thunderstorms.   Tornadoes form when warm, humid air collides with cold, dry air.   The denser cold air is pushed over the warm air, usually producing thunderstorms. The warm air rises through the colder air, causing an updraft. The updraft will begin to rotate if winds vary sharply in speed or direction.   As the rotating updraft, called a mesocycle, draws in more warm air from the moving thunderstorm, its rotation speed increases. Cool air fed by the jet stream, a strong band of wind in the atmosphere, provides even more energy.   Water droplets from the mesocyclone's moist air form a funnel cloud. The funnel continues to grow and eventually it descends from the cloud. When it touches the ground, it becomes a tornado.   Characteristics of Tornadoes   Twisters are usually accompanied or preceded by severe thunderstorms and hlgh wlnds. Hail is also common.   Once a tornado hits the ground, it may live for as little as a few seconds or as long as three hours.   The average twister is about 660 feet (200 meters) wide and moves about 30 miles (50 kilometers) an hour. Most don't travel more than six miles (ten kilometers) before dying out.   Massive tornadoes, howeverthe ones capable of widespread destruction and many deathscan roar along as fast as 300 miles (480 kilometers) an hour.   These measurements are scientists' best estimations. Anemometers, which measure wind speed, cannot withstand the enormous force of tornadoes to record them.   Using units F0 to F5, the Fujita scale measures a tornado's intensity by analyzing the damage a tornado has done and then matching that to the wind speeds estimated to produce comparable damage.   What Damage Do Tornadoes Do?   Every year in the United States, tornadoes do about 400 million dollars in damage and kill about 70 people on average.   Extremely high winds tear homes and businesses apart. Winds can also destroy bridges, flip trains, send cars and trucks flying, tear the bark off trees, and suck all the water from a riverbed.   High winds sometimes kill or injure people by rolling them along the ground or dropping them from dangerous heights. But most tornado victims are struck by flying debrisroofing shingles, broken glass, doors, metal rods.   The number of average deaths per year in the United States used to be higher before improved forecasting and warning systems were put into place.   How Are Tornadoes Forecasted?   Meteorologists at the U.S. National Weather Service use Doppler radar, satellites, weather balloons, and computer modeling to watch the skies for severe storms and tornadic activity.   Doppler radars record wind speeds and identify areas of rotation within thunderstorms. Since Doppler radar has been in use, the warning time for tornadoes has grown from fewer than five minutes in the 1980s to an average of 13 minutes today.   When weather conditions are conducive for tornado formation, the National Weather Service issues a tornado watch. When a tornado has been sighted or indicated on radar, a tornado warning is issued.   Some scientists, meteorology buffs, and adrenaline junkies hit the road during tornado season to chase storms. Researchers race to place sensors in tornadoes' paths. The sensors measure data such as wind speed, barometric pressure, humidity, and temperature.   The challenge for researchers is being in the right place at the right time, a nearly impossible feat. Every morning they study weather conditions and head for the area that seems most likely to spawn a twister. They drive through severe storms, dodge lightning, face flash floods, and get pounded by hailsometimes for yearsbefore ever spotting a tornado. 13 STRIKING PHOTOGRAPHS OF NATURAL DISASTERS 
Picture of lightning striking beneath a picturesque supercell thunderstorm 
Picture of A gondola from Sugarbush Resort takes skiers to the top of a peak
VIEW IMAGES
LIGHTNING STRIKESA supercell thunderstorm strikes in South Dakota. Among the most severe storms, supercells can bring strong winds, hail, and even tornadoes.
PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM REED, NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC             
YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE

Watch: Lioness Cub Rescued From 80-Foot Well
After nearly six hours of treading water, the lioness was pulled up by a lasso.
Picture of a female patient at a hospital in Amman, Jordan
One Electrician's Work Makes a Big Difference at a Hospital for Refugees
For patients recovering from war injuries, a simple light bulb change, among others, brightens the picture.
Picture of a man taking a selfies with a Quokka
'World's Happiest Animal' Bouncing Back, Thanks to Golf
Considered vulnerable to extinction, the quokka is now booming on Rottnest Island not in spite of urban...
