Sangre de Cristo Mountains
MOUNTAINS, UNITED STATES
WRITTEN BY: The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica
See Article History
Sangre de Cristo Mountains, segment of the southern Rocky Mountains, extending south-southeastward for about 250 miles (400 km) from Poncha Pass, in south-central Colorado, U.S., to the low divide southwest of Las Vegas, N.M., in north-central New Mexico. Usually considered an extension of the Front Range (q.v.), they are divided into the Culebra and Sangre de Cristo ranges in Colorado. Many of their glaciated summits surpass 14,000 feet (4,300 m), including Kit Carson, Crestone, and Humboldt, with Blanca Peak (14,345 feet [4,372 m]) being the highest. The southern portion culminates at Wheeler Peak (13,161 feet [4,011 m]), New Mexico’s highest point.

Sangre de Cristo Mountains: Blanca Peak
Sangre de Cristo Mountains: Blanca Peak
Blanca Peak in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, Colorado.
Meniscus
The mountains were named in 1719 by the Spanish explorer Antonio Valverde y Cosio, who, impressed at sunrise by the red-tinted, snowy peaks, supposedly uttered a fervent “Sangre de Cristo” (“Blood of Christ”). Headstreams of the Pecos and Canadian rivers originate within the range, which is embraced by San Isabel, Rio Grande, Carson, and Santa Fe national forests and includes the Great Sand Dunes (Colorado) and Pecos (New Mexico) national monuments. Tourism and mining are the main economic activities.

LEARN MORE in these related Britannica articles:
The simple pattern of Colorado's state flag-a red letter C surrounding a gold disk on blue and white stripes-yields a variety of interpretations. The capital letter stands not only for Colorado but also for its nicknames, the Columbine State(the columbin
Colorado: Relief and drainage
The Sangre de Cristo Range is a linear range in the south-central region of the state. At its western base are some of the largest sand dunes in the interior of the North American continent, an area of 60 square miles (155 square km) set aside…
New Mexico's first flag, adopted on March 19, 1915, was one of the few state flags to incorporate the Stars and Stripes in its design. Another distinctive flag was adopted on March 15, 1925. Its ancient Native American sun symbol represents the state's perennial sunshine and pays tribute to the Zia Indian Pueblo. Red and yellow are the colors of old Spain, which once ruled the area.
New Mexico: Relief
…[3,994 metres]), are in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains in the north-central part of the state. The lowest elevation, 2,842 feet (866 metres), lies along Red Bluff Lake in the southeastern corner of the state.…
Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve
…the foot of the steep Sangre de Cristo Mountains to the east. The national preserve encompasses a portion of the western-slope watershed of the Sangre de Cristo, from the base of the mountains to the crestline; elevations often extend above 13,000 feet (3,960 metres), and there are numerous alpine lakes…
Pikes Peak
Front Range
Front Range, easternmost section of the Southern Rocky Mountains in the west-central United States. It extends about 300 miles (500 km) south-southeastward from near Casper in southeastern Wyoming to Fremont county in south-central Colorado. The Front Range is 40 to 50 miles (65 to 80 km) wide and includes the…
North America
North America
North America, third largest of the world’s continents, lying for the most part between the Arctic Circle and the Tropic of Cancer. It extends for more than 5,000 miles (8,000 km) to within 500 miles (800 km) of both the North Pole and the Equator and has an east-west extent of 5,000 miles. It…
ADDITIONAL MEDIA
Hermit Peak
Taos Mountains
MORE ABOUT Sangre de Cristo Mountains
3 REFERENCES FOUND IN BRITANNICA ARTICLES
Assorted References
Colorado
In Colorado: Relief and drainage
Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve
In Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve
New Mexico
In New Mexico: Relief