    San Juan Islands Travel Region  Orcas Island, Washington   List with Go Northwest!   Orcas Island is the largest of the San 
		Juan Islands , which are located off the northern coast of Washington State . Approximately an hour and twenty minutes from the 
		mainland city of Anacortes by ferry, Orcas is home to an eclectic community of 
		artisans and small cottage businesses. Its diverse landscape of 
		mountains, wooded countryside and spectacular vistas make it a popular 
		destination for both day trips and extended vacations.  Orcas Island visitors arrive at the Washington State Ferry landing at 
	  Orcas Village. Go Northwest! photo by Dave Dean  Name  Orcas Island, is not named after the Orca whales as 
one might expect, but rather, named after Don Juan Vincente de Guemes Pacheco 
Padilla Horcasitas y Aguayo Conde de Revilla Gigedo ;(!!), the patron of a 
Spanish explorer and viceroy of Mexico.  The Towns of Orcas Island  Eastsound is the largest town on the island and is home to a variety 
		of accommodations and restaurants. Four other small communities, Olga, 
		Deer Sound, West Sound and Doe Bay are scattered across the 
		horseshoe-shaped island and have a range of galleries, artist studios 
		and shopping amenities.  Orcas Island Accommodations  Rosario Resort, the island's largest hotel, is the former estate of 
		shipbuilder Robert Moran and offers first-class dining and 
		accommodations, as well as sweeping views of sound. There also are a 
		number of bed and breakfast inns located throughout the island.  Orcas Island Countryside  Moran State Park is located near Eastsound and is a favorite camping 
		location. Mount Constitution, which towers 2,409 feet, affords a 
		spectacular 360-degree view of the surrounding parklands and islands.  Many people however, come to Orcas to tour the countryside by bicycle 
		or to kayak the fjords and coastal waters. Day tours are available 
		through several local companies on the island.  Getting to Orcas Island  Orcas Island can be reached from the mainland via a leisurely ferry 
		ride from Anacortes or by seaplane from Seattle or Portland , Oregon. Visitors should plan visits ahead of time and 
		check ferry and plane schedules. Not all of the ferries stop at Orcas 
		Island and travel times vary according to the time of day. Orcas Island 
		also makes an ideal lunch or dinner stop from any of the adjacent San 
		Juan Islands.         