Sun Tzu
Material from Wikipedia - free encyclopedias
Sun Tzu
( Chinese : trad .孫子, ex .孙子, pinyin : sūnzǐ )
Enchoen27n3200.jpg
Monument Sun Tzu in Yurihami , Tottori , Japan
date birth	
544 BC _ e.
Place birth	
kingdom qi

date of death	
496 BC _ e.
Place of death	
kingdom qi

years services	
6th century BC _ e.

Rank	
commander

commanded	
troops the kingdom of Wu

Battles / wars	
battles period Chunqiu

- logo.svg Sun Tzu on the Wikimedia Commons
V this Chinese name surname ( Sun ) stands front personal name .
This article about military strategist Sun Tzu . About mathematics see _ Sun Tzu ( mathematician ).
Not should confused with philosopher Xun Tzu (荀子; c . 313-238 BC - also famous how xun Quan ).

Sun Tzu ( Chinese : trad .孫子, ex .孙子, pinyin : sūnzǐ ; when _ birth Sun Wu, second name Zhangqing - Chinese strategist and thinker who lived in the VI century BC _ e. author famous treatise on military strategies « Art wars ."

Content 
1 	Historical facts
2 	Ideas
3 	notes
4 	Literature
historical facts
Traditionally dates life Sun Tzu dated 544-496 years BC _ e. but found in 1972 in a burial start era Han new extended option labor Sun Tzu gives grounds date his creation second half of the 5th century BC _ e. ( 453-403 BC ) . And the results row later research carried out how Chinese and Western _ _ scientists indicate on the what _ _ Sun Tzu maybe be identical real historical face , commander Sun Binu , who lived in the Kingdom Qi in the 4th century BC _ e. ( approximately 380-325 years _ BC _ e.) during the period Fighting kingdoms [1]. More one historical prototype Sun Tzu called Wu Zixu .

Biographical information about Sun Tzu recorded Syma Qian in his Historical _ notes ." Name Sun Tzu was "U". He born in the kingdom Qi . Sun Tzu served hired commander prince Hello in the kingdom of W.


« Art war " Sun Tzu in the form of " bamboo books " - jiandu times emperor Qianlong (1736-1795). From meetings Californian University at Riverside .
According to Syma Qianyu , prince Heluy invited Sun Tzu talk about military deed . For order to _ show own art , commander asked prince hand over him their harems . Sun Tzu divided concubines on the two squad , putting in chapter everyone on main concubine , issuing _ them on halberd , and became explain military commands . Detachments occupied combat building . When Sun Tzu became command " right ", " left ", " forward " - no one not performed commands , and all only laughed . So repeated several times . Then Sun Tzu said : if _ commands not are fulfilled , it guilt commanders . And ordered execute two major concubines . Prince , realizing what it not joke , became ask cancel execution , however Sun Tzu stated that _ on the war commander more important ruler and no one not dare cancel his orders . _ Concubines were executed . After this all women squeezed teeth and steel properly fulfill commands . but when prince called spend review troops , prince not appeared . Sun Tzu reproached prince that _ that maybe only talk about military deed . Tem not less when _ arose military danger , prince forced was call sun tzu and trust him army , and Sun Tzu won large victory .

On the positions commander troops Sun Tzu defeated strong kingdom Chu , captured his capital city _ Ying , inflicted defeat kingdoms Qi , and Jin . Thanks to his victories kingdom of wu strengthened own power , and was included in the number kingdoms civilized China , led by kings dynasty Zhou , and the king Heluy joined the Zhuhou - officially _ _ recognized rulers independent possessions . In the 4th century BC _ e. Wei lao Tzu wrote : " There was the person who had only 30,000 troops , and in the Middle Kingdom no one not could resist him . Who is it ? Answer : Sun Tzu ".

Sun Tzu wrote on request prince Helyuya treatise on military art [2], traditionally called " Art war " ( translations by N. I. Konrad , V. A. Shaban , V. V. Malyavin ). Then he returned to his native kingdom qi and there soon died . On the origin from Sun Tzu _ century later claimed living in the era three kingdoms members clan Sunei ( Sun Jian , Sun Tse , Sun Quan ).

Ideas
Main article : Art wars
Sun Tzu thought war forced evil , which should avoid like _ only possible . He notes that " war is _ _ how fire , people who _ not lay down weapons will perish from own same weapons ." war should lead quickly in avoid economic loss : " Neither one long war not brought arrived country : 100 victories in 100 battles is simply funny . Everyone who _ distinguished himself crushing enemies , got victory more before how _ _ enemy threat became real ." According to book , follows to avoid massacres and atrocities , because what it maybe provoke resistance and give adversary opportunity draw war in his favor .

General ideology Sun Tzu combines _ _ Confucian foundations maintaining social homeostasis with Taoist dialectics universal Dao , cosmic cyclism schools yin-yang , legalistic " political science " and managerial pragmatism Moists . This synthesis representing _ _ war ( bin ), with one sides like ' great _ case state ", " soil life and death , the path ( tao ) of existence and death ”, and on the other hand , as “the path deception ”, summarized in 5 principles :

" ways " ( unanimity people and leaders ),
" heaven " ( correspondences time ),
" lands " ( correspondences place ),
" commander " ( correct guides , in particular characterized reliability - xin and humanity - jen ),
" law " ( organization and discipline ).
Data principles must be realizable through 7 " calculations ":

ruler has _ dao ,
presence of the commander abilities ,
comprehension features heaven and earth ,
feasibility laws and orders ,
strength troops ,
training commanders and soldiers _
clarity rewards and punishments .
V further this dialectics fidelity and deceit , strength and weakness , militancy and peacefulness became one from major methodology traditional Chinese culture , art stratagem .

Sun 's War Tzu considered how organic whole , from diplomacy and mobilization to _ _ espionage . Never it is forbidden forget the goal wars - do so that _ population flourished and was loyal to the ruler .

Ideal victory - submission others states diplomatic methods , without entry into the military actions . So necessary lead active diplomacy , destroy unions enemy and break his strategy .

Sun Tzu constantly emphasizes that _ military actions it expensive occupation that brings lesion state and disaster people . So war should be fast , efficient and mobile . Tighten war inhumane on attitude towards the people .

V basis concepts Sun Tzu lies control enemy creating _ opportunities light victory . Necessary entice the enemy to trap and avoid clashes with trained forces enemy . Necessary nonequilibrium distribution forces , strategic concentration .

Necessary gather information about the area and activities enemy , and this hide their actions . Any payment activities spies will cost cheaper than _ content army . So it is forbidden regret money on the espionage and bribery .

Sun Tzu repeatedly emphasizes need discipline in the troops and maintenance spirit ( qi ). Necessary create situations in which spirit troops grows stronger , and avoid those where _ army loses will .

Notes
↑ The Art of War , Sun Zi's Military Methods, Translated by Victor H. Meir, Columbia University Press , 2007 ISBN 978-0-231-13383-8, Introduction p . 14
↑ Art wars »
Literature
Wikiquote-logo.svg Wikiquote there is page on topic
Sun Tzu _
Sun Tzu , Wu Tzu . treatises on military art . - M .: "AST", 2002. ISBN 5-17-010705-6.
Sun Tzu . _ treatise on military art . Translation and research by N. I. Konrad . - M.-L.: Publishing House of the Academy of Sciences, 1950. - 404 p.
Sun Tzu . _ treatise on military art . Per . with others _ whale . Shaban V.A. - S.-Pb. almanac "F2", 2008.
Zotov O. V. About logic and structure treatise Sun Tzu //25th Scientific conference " Society and State in China ". M., 1994. S.86-95.
McNeilly, Mark R. (2001), Sun Tzu and the Art of Modern Warfare, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-513340-4.
