American Bourgeois Revolution
The main prerequisite for the rupture of the thirteen colonies with England was the development of capitalism in them. The American Revolution was a historically natural event, prepared by all the previous development of the colonies. The immediate cause of the mass movement against the mother country in the 60s, and then the revolutionary war against it in 1775, was the policy of increased pressure and oppression that England began to implement in the colonies after the Seven Years' War.
Aggravation of relations between the colonies and the metropolis
No longer needing the support of the colonies to wage war, and having crushed the last of its rivals in North America, France, the British bourgeoisie could now begin to solve a new task: to stop the growth of the economic independence of the colonies, which threatened their monopoly profits, to strangle a new dangerous competitor in the person of the American bourgeoisie. . The rapid rise in production in England itself, associated with the industrial revolution, made the English bourgeoisie especially interested in maintaining their dominance in the American markets. The pursuance of a tougher course towards the colonies found expression primarily in a number of decisive measures against the smuggling trade that flourished in the colonies.
In search of additional sources to cover the budget deficit resulting from the Seven Years' War, the British government introduced direct and indirect taxation of the population of the American colonies. Having met with stubborn opposition, it decided to ensure the obedience of the colonies with the help of armed force.
Blinded by their successes in the struggle for world commercial and colonial predominance, the ruling classes of England did not understand that a policy that created artificial obstacles to the free development of the American colonies would inevitably arouse on the part of the latter the determination to fight for complete separation from the mother country.
In 1763, King George III issued a proclamation forbidding the colonization of lands located west of the Allegheny Mountains. In addition to the desire to maintain the crown's monopoly on these lands and to provide English trading companies with profits from the fur trade with the Indians, the metropolitan government set itself the goal of preventing further settlement of colonists on the North American mainland. In a narrow strip along the Atlantic coast, it was easier for the British authorities to collect taxes, carry out measures to stifle local industry, suppress smuggling, increase police pressure, and keep the colonies under the threat of armed force.
The following year, 1764, Parliament dealt a severe blow to the lucrative trade of North American merchants with the West Indies by imposing duties on the import of sugar into the English colonies. At the end of the Seven Years' War, the prohibition of issuing paper money, which had previously applied only to New England, was extended to all colonies. This caused a stagnation in trade and industry, further aggravated by the Act of Parliament in 1765 imposing stamp duty on all judicial and commercial records, periodicals, pamphlets, etc. Anticipating the discontent of the colonists, Parliament, under the pretext of defense against the Indians, in advance adopted a law on the deployment of troops in the colonies.
The policy of the metropolis infringed upon the interests not of any one class in the colonies, but of all classes. The ban on settlements in the fertile lands of the West was directed not only against farmers, who constituted the vast majority of the population of the colonies, but also against artisans and workers who sought in squatterism an escape from capitalist exploitation. It also affected the interests of the plantation owners, who saw in land speculation an opportunity to improve their business, shaken in connection with the crisis of the plantation economy. The prohibition of issuing paper money further worsened their position as debtors of British merchants.
Mass movement against stamp duty
Such actions of the British authorities, as the deployment of troops or the law on stamp duty, could not be regarded otherwise than as an attack on the rights of the local population. One of the many proclamations concerning the stamp duty expressed the fear that "the British authorities would not impose a tax on the vote, on the sunlight and the air we breathe, on the earth on which we lie." The policy of colonial enslavement strengthened the American people's sense of unity and national identity.
Like the English bourgeoisie of the seventeenth century, which began its struggle against the feudal-absolutist monarchy by refusing to pay taxes, the colonial bourgeoisie, whose representatives gathered in 1765 for a congress on stamp duty, refused to recognize the right of the English Parliament to tax colonies that did not have their own representatives in parliament. She wrote on her banner: "No taxes without representation."
Congress did not limit itself to an outwardly loyal petition to the king to abolish the stamp duty. Desiring to infringe economically on their competitor, the American bourgeoisie adopted a decision to boycott British goods and to take measures to produce everything necessary in the colonies. From the rostrum of Congress, for the first time, there was a call to forget about belonging to a particular colony and become Americans. Patrick Henry's impassioned call to action in the Virginia Legislature's speech also resonated widely. The speaker pathetically ended his speech with the exclamation: "Freedom or death!"
The decision to boycott caused indignation in the ruling circles of England, and even Pitt, who did not approve of a too harsh course towards the colonies, announced that he would go at the head of those who would drive the Americans out of the workshops by force of arms, in which they would begin to manufacture everything they needed for themselves. In less than a few months, the English merchants were convinced that they had lost more than £700,000 as a result of the boycott. Art.
The decisive role in the movement against the stamp duty, as well as in monitoring the implementation of the boycott, belonged to the mass organization of artisans, workers, urban petty bourgeoisie, called the "Sons of Liberty", or "Freedom Tree Party". This organization was headed by leading figures of the colonial bourgeoisie—Samuel Adams in Massachusetts, John Lemb and Isaac Seere in New York, and Christopher Gadsden in North Carolina. The Boston organization also developed agitation among farmers.
"Sons of Liberty" staged demonstrations and processions, broke into the houses of collectors, forcing them to publicly resign their positions, burned warehouses with stamped paper, and closed the courts. Those who acted as the defenders of the metropolis were coated with resin and rolled out in feathers. In August 1765, Bostonians ransacked the home of the hated royal governor Hutchinson. On the day the Stamp Act went into effect, November 1, 1765, they held a funeral ceremony for "colonial freedom" 145 years since the first settlement; the ceremony ended with "freedom", with the general rejoicing of those present, safely getting up from the hearse. In the spring of 1766 Parliament had to abolish the stamp duty. To maintain the prestige of the crown, this concession was accompanied by a declaration of the supreme power of Parliament over the colonies and its right to tax them.
The abolition of the stamp duty was solemnly celebrated with salutes, the ringing of bells, processions during which the portraits of the hated English ministers Grenville and Butte were burned.
Bourgeois historiography often ignores the role of the masses in the development of the movement against England. Meanwhile, the mass popular organizations of the "Sons of Liberty" occupy a prominent place in the history of the struggle for independence. In view of the expected clash with the British troops, a militia was created, numbering 40,000 in the colonies of Massachusetts and New Hampshire and 10,000 in Connecticut.
Some decline in the movement in connection with the abolition of the stamp duty was replaced in 1767 by a new rise after the introduction of the so-called Townshend duties (on the import of tea, glass, paints). Troops continued to be stationed in the colonies; several legislative assemblies were dissolved for resistance.
Worried about the activity of the masses and the revolutionary character that the protests against the stamp duty have begun to take, the bourgeoisie, in order to retain the leadership of the movement, is carrying out a decision to boycott English goods through the legislative assemblies. After the Townshend duties, like the stamp duty, were abolished, with the exception of the duty on tea, the bourgeoisie of New York and Charleston, in order to suppress the democratic elements, set about creating special organizations "to combat mob violence." Artisans and workers in their turn began to create their own special organizations.
The liberation movement of the rising North American nation was not united. The urban petty bourgeoisie, workers and farmers associated with the struggle against colonial oppression their hopes for acquiring political rights, for free access to land. They sought not only independence, but also the replacement of the rule of the commercial and landowning aristocracy by the power of the democratic majority of the people. These working strata constituted the left, bourgeois-democratic wing of the Whig or Revolutionist Party.
The top of the bourgeoisie and the planters constituted the right wing of this party. With the exception of individuals who immediately connected their fate with the liberation movement, the majority of this right wing hesitated for a long time before deciding to break with the mother country, and sought a compromise. They were worried about the prospect of losing British markets and terrified of the revolutionary activity of the masses.
The party of open supporters of the metropolis - the Tories, or Loyalists, included, first of all, those who were associated with large landed property, with the British crown, with British capital. A small part of the southern planters adjoined the owners of large estates received from the crown. Then followed merchants who operated with British capital, owners of shares in the Bank of England, shareholders in the East India and other monopoly companies, royal officials, clergy (mainly ministers of the state Anglican church) and other elements, one way or another connected with their interests and their welfare with England. During and after the War of Independence, between 60,000 and 90,000 Tories moved to Canada, the West Indies, and England.
Correspondent committees
On March 5, 1770, the first bloody clash with British troops took place on the streets of Boston: six workers were killed and as many wounded. Among the first Americans to give their lives for national independence was the Negro Crispus Attacs. “The blood spilled on the pavement of Boston,” wrote Adams, “is crying out for vengeance.” Since the Boston massacre, armed struggle has become only a matter of time.
In 1772 it was announced that henceforth the payment of governors, judges and other officials would be made from the royal treasury. This meant the complete independence of royal officials from legislative assemblies, and the bourgeoisie immediately took steps to form their own authorities. At a city meeting in Boston, a special public body was elected, headed by Samuel Adams, Joseph Warren, Paul Riveri, called the Correspondence Committee.
The committee seized de facto power in Boston and appealed to other colonies to follow suit. In the spring of 1773 similar committees were formed in Virginia and other colonies.
In 1773, the English Parliament passed the "tea law", by which he wanted to confirm the inviolability of his rights to tax the colonies. Immediately after this, a broad movement began in the colonies to boycott tea.
The East India Company, which monopolized the tea trade in the North American colonies, was not only the worst competitor of American merchants, but was widely hated as the personification of colonial oppression.
In December 1773, by decision of a city meeting in Boston, a cargo of tea belonging to the East India Company was thrown into the ocean. The bold actions of the Bostonians were enthusiastically supported by all the colonies without exception. In London, the "Boston Tea Party" was regarded as an attack on British property and its dominance over the colonies.
Repression against Boston
Severe repressions were applied to the rebellious city. The Boston port was closed, its population doomed to starvation. The royal governor received emergency powers, the colony of Massachusetts lost its charter of self-government; instead of a jury trial, it was planned to send the accused to trial in England. City rallies, which the people cherished as a long-standing democratic tradition, were banned.
The repression caused widespread outrage. All the colonies began to provide assistance to the starving population of Boston. June 1, 1774, the day the Boston Port Closing Bill went into effect, was declared a day of "mourning, fasting, and prayer" in Virginia.
The so-called Quebec Act, which was simultaneously passed by Parliament, aimed at isolating Canada from the revolutionary movement of the thirteen American colonies, contributed a lot to the growth of indignation. The Quebec Act confirmed the national French character of Canada and preserved its feudal orders and Catholic institutions. The greatest indignation in the colonies was caused by the fact that the Act of Quebec annexed to Canada a huge northwestern territory beyond the Alleghenies, recently conquered from France with the help of American colonists.
An outstanding figure in the bourgeois-democratic wing of the liberation movement, Thomas Jefferson, addressing George III, wrote that the lands of America do not belong to the crown by feudal right, but by the law of nature they belong to those who watered them with their blood and cultivated them with their own hands. The "Quebec Act" raised farming to the struggle, thus ensuring the participation of the bulk of the population of the colonies in the revolutionary movement against England.
I Continental Congress
In September 1774, the First Continental Congress of representatives of all the colonies met in Philadelphia, with the exception of Georgia, whose delegation was delayed by the governor. Most of the members of Congress belonged to the number of supporters of a peaceful solution to the conflict, offering compensation for the losses of the East India Company and the preservation of the American colonies within the British Empire on the terms of transferring the right of taxation to the colonies.
But there was also an influential leftist minority at the congress, headed by S. Adams, P. Henry, K. Gadsden. These were in favor of immediate offensive action against the British troops before they received reinforcements. The left wing managed to pass the resolution proposed by J. Warren on disobedience to British orders, on the boycott of British goods and the beginning of military preparations.
Congress established the Continental Association, which was instructed to take steps to stop English exports and imports and suspend the slave trade. The success of the left wing was the transfer of control over the execution of the decisions of the association from the legislative assemblies to the people's committees elected in each district, most often referred to as "Committees of Security". Under their effective control, trade with England fell from £2,500,000 to £2,500,000 in the year 1775 alone. Art. up to 200 thousand, f. Art. Congress appealed to the king with a complaint about the oppression of the colonies; at the same time he adopted an appeal to the people of 13 colonies, to the peoples of England and Canada.
Start of the War of Independence
In the winter of 1774/75, armed detachments began to spring up spontaneously in the colonies, the members of which called themselves "men of the minute" or "freedom boys." They themselves elected commanders from among themselves, took out weapons, and tirelessly monitored the actions of the British troops.
Headed by the engraver Paul Rivery, intelligence managed to warn S. Adams and J. Hancock about the impending arrest. Having galloped to Lexington at night, Rivery also had time to warn the "men of the minute" about the impending capture by the British of the arms depots. A detachment of English soldiers who arrived there in the morning was met by the partisans in full combat readiness.
In the first battles at Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775, the British troops encountered the tactics of loose formation. The guerrillas fired accurately from behind trees and buildings and remained themselves invulnerable; the British lost a third of their soldiers. These events served as a signal for the widespread seizure of weapons by the people. The revolt against Britain has begun.
II Continental Congress
On May 10, 1775, the Second Continental Congress met. He stated the state of war with England and on June 15 decided to organize the army. George Washington, a wealthy Virginian planter, was placed at its head. A talented commander and an outstanding politician, he won popularity among the broad masses of the people by his consistent struggle for the independence of the colonies. His election was to symbolize the unity of the northern and southern colonies in the struggle against a common enemy.
Congress has not kept up with the rapidly unfolding events. At this time, the 20,000-strong army of "people of the minute" and the colonial militia, who called themselves the "freedom camp", had already surrounded Boston with the British army in it.
Having captured one of the heights that dominated the city - Bankershill, the Americans repelled three fierce enemy attacks during the day on June 17. After losing 450 killed and wounded, they left Bankershill only after they ran out of gunpowder. British losses amounted to a thousand soldiers and officers. The winners did not flatter themselves about their success. “Another such victory,” wrote a London newspaper, “and there will be no one left to bring the news home.”
In July 1775, after Lexington and Bankershill, the right-wing elements of the Congress, led by John Dickinson, made a new attempt at reconciliation by sending the so-called olive branch petition to the king. The government of George III responded with a call for armed suppression of the "rebels". The British fleet burned the city of Folmouth (now Portland) and in January 1776 devastated the coast of Virginia near the village of Creek Bridge.
The repression and cruelty applied in the colonies on the orders of the metropolitan authorities contributed to the growth among the masses of not only anti-British, but also anti-monarchist sentiments, shaking the previously strong faith in the "good" king of England.
The pamphlet "Common Sense" published in January 1776, written by Thomas Pan, a democratic leader who arrived in 1774 from England, contributed a lot to the clarification of the revolutionary consciousness of the masses. Pan called the people of the colonies to arms, to revolt against the ruling classes of Britain and against a monarchy "cursed by providence and reason." Referring to the "natural rights" of man, Pan's pamphlet called for the establishment of the independence of the colonies and the creation of a democratic order in them, which would make North America a refuge for humanity suffering under the feudal-monarchical yoke.
The ideas of independence and democracy met the hopes and aspirations of the broad masses. The pamphlet received something unprecedented in 18th-century America. Spread. It was read and reread by farmers, artisans, merchants, guerrillas, and soldiers in Washington's army.
In the spring of 1776 the revolutionary wing of the bourgeoisie won a decisive victory in Congress. A number of radical measures were taken, the hated navigational acts were annulled and American ports were opened to ships of all countries. In order to fight against the blockade of the colonies established by the British fleet, a decision was made to equip privateer ships. Congress formed a secret committee of external relations, which began the search for allies in Europe among the enemies of England and took steps to acquire weapons and ships.
On May 10, 1776, Congress proposed to all colonies that they establish new governments to replace royal officials. This has already been done in a number of colonies. Independent republics—states—were proclaimed everywhere, and constitutions were drawn up that abolished the privileges of the landed aristocracy and abolished the electoral land qualification. The constitution included special clauses on the abolition of the semi-feudal fixed rent and on the elimination of other elements of feudalism.
The most important measure of the bourgeois revolution was the decision of the congress to disarm the loyalists and confiscate their property. The lands of the crown, the state Anglican Church, large estates of the former owners of the colonies - William Penn in Pennsylvania, Lord Baltimore in Maryland - were expropriated. In Maine, the estate of Baronet William Pepperel, stretching along the coast for 30 miles, was confiscated; in Virginia, the estate of Lord Fairfax, which reached 6 million acres. In New York, in addition to crown lands, 59 private estates worth $3 million were confiscated; in Massachusetts, the property of 300 families of the aristocracy was confiscated.
At a new stage in the development of the revolution, the activities of the "correspondence, security, surveillance" committees expanded. These committees maintained contact between the colonies, carried out anti-British propaganda, were in charge of conscription to the police, the supply of weapons, and intelligence. Their functions also included the implementation of revolutionary terror against the loyalists. The committees usually carried out the confiscation of the property of the latter. For this, "black lists" of suspected treason were drawn up. In Massachusetts, at city rallies, everyone had the right to name a suspect in aiding the enemy. If the majority supported the charge, such a person was put on trial and expelled, most often to England, at his own expense. Exiles were forbidden to return to their homeland under the threat of death. The death penalty also awaited those whose treason was irrefutably proven in court.
Declaration of Independence
On July 4, 1776, Congress passed Jefferson's Declaration of Independence. The new state - the United States of America - began its independent existence. The text of the Declaration was read to the people to the sound of cannon salutes and the ringing of bells; by order of Washington, it was introduced to soldiers going into battle. These days, a lead statue of King George in New York has been melted down into bullets.
The Declaration of Independence evoked sympathetic responses throughout Europe, awakening forces to fight against absolutism and feudalism.
With the constant vacillations of the right-wing elements of the bourgeoisie, a decisive break with the mother country was possible only thanks to the revolutionary movement of the masses, which at that time reached its highest peak. The adoption of the Declaration was not only a victory for the supporters of independence, but also a victory for the revolutionary wing over the moderates within the Whig party. The Declaration of Independence, the first declaration of the rights of man, bore the impress of the revolutionary upsurge that gave rise to it and differed significantly from the later, more moderate documents of the American Revolution. It was an anti-feudal and anti-monarchist manifesto proclaiming republican and bourgeois-democratic freedoms: equality before the law, the sovereignty of the people, their right to change the form of power.
In enumerating the natural rights of man, the declaration did not mention property. Jefferson, like Rousseau, Mably, Thomas Pan and other representatives of the left trend in the bourgeois theory of natural law, connected the concept of "property" with the concept of "labor" and classified it as a civil right, not a natural one, that is, he considered it an institution, historically transient, while Locke and his followers declared property to be a natural, eternal, and inviolable right. Therefore, in the generally accepted bourgeois formula "life, liberty, property," Jefferson replaced the word "property" with the words "pursuit of happiness."
In the original draft, drawn up by Jefferson, the Declaration contained a strong condemnation of slavery and the slave trade "as a cruel war against human nature itself", and accused the "tyrant" George III, who oppressed both Americans and Negroes, of encouraging slavery in the colonies. The Declaration charged him with 26 other charges. But the paragraph on the condemnation of slavery was struck out of the Declaration at the request of the slave owners of South Carolina and Georgia, who made this a condition for their participation in the war against England. Their demand was supported by northern merchants and shipowners who profited from the Negro trade.
After the end of the War of Independence, the slave trade was resumed, and in the pursuit of profits, American slave owners far outnumbered the English.
Military operations 1775-1778
The main theater of war for the first three years remained the northern and central states. The British strategic plan called for isolating New England from the rest of the resource-rich states by capturing New York and the Hudson River Valley. In other theatres, the British, not risking an invasion into the depths of a vast hostile country and using their superiority at sea, limited themselves to offensive actions on the coast near their bases.
The American army was forced to stick to defensive tactics. She undertook only one offensive operation on the borders of British Canada, with the aim of preventing the enemy from seizing the Hudson Valley, and also to achieve Canada's accession to the anti-British uprising. The leaders of the rebellious colonies had no doubt that the Canadians, too, were striving for separation from England, which had only recently subdued them by force. The 1st and 2nd Congresses were called Continental precisely because it was supposed to unite against England all her colonies on the North American continent; a special paragraph was included in the text of the Articles of Confederation for Canada to join the United States, if it so desired.
In the spring of 1775, without the knowledge of Congress, a detachment of rebels who called themselves the "Green Mountain Boys" went to the Canadian border, led by Ethan Allen, later the author of the militant anti-clerical work "Reason is the only oracle of man." He captured the fortress of Ticonderoga with a large number of cannons and equipment so needed by the rebels.
Having received reinforcements, the American army took Montreal in November, but was defeated near Quebec and could no longer succeed. But the threat to Canada diverted significant British forces to this theater throughout the war.
Besieged in the spring of 1775 in Boston, the British army surrendered it in March 1776, leaving significant military supplies here. Together with the British, 1,100 loyalists left.
At the end of August 1776, the American army under the command of Washington, defending New York, was almost surrounded at Long Island. The army was saved at the cost of losing New York, which remained in the hands of the British until the end of the war. In December, the British inflicted another serious defeat at Trenton on the enemy retreating from New York to Pennsylvania.
At this critical moment, General Charles Lee surrendered to the British with his army. He was subsequently released from captivity and managed to become the second person in command after Washington; contemporaries did not know about his betrayal, it was established only after 80 years.
In the winter of 1776/77, the congressional army, which still bore little resemblance to the regular army, experienced great difficulties in supplying and arming. Under the influence of successive defeats, the army was losing morale. It was reduced from 34 thousand to 4 thousand people. Thomas Pan, who was with the army, began at this time to publish his magazine The American Crisis. In the first issue, appealing to the courage of Americans, Peng wrote that the more difficult the trials, the more joyful the victory will be, and urged his compatriots to be courageous and "smile in adversity."
On Christmas night 1776, Washington, having received fresh reinforcements, suddenly crossed the Delaware, attacked the British camp at Trenton and captured a thousand English mercenaries. In January 1777 he inflicted a new defeat on the British at Princeton.
The British command, attaching decisive importance to the capture of the Hudson Valley, in the autumn of 1777 launched an offensive with the forces of three armies: the army of Burgoyne, moving from the Canadian border, the army of St. Leger, in which there were many American Tories and Indians, advancing from Lake Ontario, and the army of Clinton operating in the area of ​​the mouth of the Hudson.
Military operations developed unsuccessfully for the British. The whole population of the states of New England rose up against them. To block the path of English ships up the Hudson, for six weeks, day and night, a gigantic iron chain 152 meters long and weighing 180 tons was forged, which was then stretched across the river. On October 19, 1777, Burgoyne's army, surrounded at Saratoga, was forced to surrender to American troops under the command of Gates. At the news of this defeat, the Tories of St. Leger's army fled, while the Indians turned their weapons against the English. The victors generously allowed the POWs to return to England on the condition that they no longer fight against the Americans.
The victory at Saratoga meant the collapse of the main strategic plan of the British command. It was of tremendous importance for the achievement of the national independence of the American people, who henceforth firmly believed in the final victory.
International position of the republic
Burgoyne's capitulation had far-reaching international consequences. After the start of military operations of the colonies against England, France declared neutrality. But, dreaming of revenge for the defeat suffered in the Seven Years' War, she secretly provided assistance to the colonies with weapons and equipment. French shipyards built ships for the Americans.
The government of Louis XVI was at that time on the verge of financial bankruptcy; meanwhile, assistance to the rebellious English colonies required large expenditures. In addition, the ruling circles of feudal-absolutist France could not fail to understand that an alliance with a republic proclaimed in America was dangerous because of its revolutionary influence on the French people. However, all considerations were dominated by feelings of hatred for the competitor and the hope of returning the colonial possessions lost in America. The victory at Saratoga finally persuaded the French government to conclude an alliance and trade treaty with the Americans, which was signed in Paris in February 1778.
After that, the British government turned to the rebels with a peace proposal, promising the rebels an amnesty and the repeal of laws adopted by Parliament since 1763 and infringing on the interests of the colonies. It urged Americans to abandon "the insincere and unnatural foreign alliance" and restore the alliance with the "motherland". Congress refused to consider the proposals of George III, demanding recognition of the full independence of the colonies and the withdrawal of the British army and navy.
Meanwhile, France entered the war against England. She also used her diplomatic influence to draw Spain into the war. The latter feared the extension of the war of liberation to her own colonies in America, but still could not resist the promises of the return of Gibraltar to her in Europe and new territorial acquisitions in North America for the Alleghenies.
Russia indirectly contributed to the victory of the colonies in the war against England. In response to the hostile actions of the English fleet against the trade of neutral powers, the Russian government led the League of Neutral Countries in 1780, proclaiming a policy of armed neutrality, to which most European states joined.
Armed squadrons of neutral powers began to guard their trade routes. Spain laid siege to Gibraltar. The French undertook military operations in India. Military operations also took place in the West Indies, off the coast of Ireland, off the Atlantic coast of England, near Plymouth, in the English Channel. Subsequently, the coalition against England was expanded by the entry into the war of Holland.
With the combined fleet of France, Spain and Holland against her, England lost superiority at sea, and further waging war in America became very difficult for her.
The Anglo-American war caused an extreme aggravation of contradictions in the camp of colonial predators. V. I. Lenin pointed out that in the interests of their liberation, the American people used the contradictions between the colonial powers by concluding agreements with France and Spain against England. This contributed to the victory of the national liberation movement in North America.
The armies of the belligerents
At the beginning of the war, it seemed very likely that powerful Great Britain, having consistently crushed the power of Holland, Spain, France, dominating the seas, would easily cope with the rebellious colonies.
At its birth, the American Republic had to assemble an army bit by bit, during the course of the war itself to create commanding cadres, with great difficulty to raise funds, to establish domestic production of weapons, uniforms, etc. Throughout the war, the rebel army suffered from a lack of weapons.
The counter-revolutionary activities of covert and overt Tories, the abuse and acquisitiveness of suppliers from among the local bourgeoisie led to the fact that, despite the abundance of food and clothing in the country, the soldiers starved, received irregular salaries, and were dressed in the most bizarre way. One musket and one blanket, as a rule, fell on three soldiers. During the brutal wintering of 1777/78 at Valley Forge, the army, which had recently won a brilliant victory at Saratoga, starved and froze in the open. Ticonderoga had 900 pairs of boots for 12 thousand soldiers. According to Washington, the paths of all the campaigns of his army are marked by traces of bloodied bare feet.
But there were also major advantages on the side of the liberation army. Its fighters fought for their own blood cause. This consciousness raised the morale of the army, and the advanced tactics of loose formation allowed it to win victories even over superior enemy forces.
The British had a trained, disciplined army led by experienced commanders. The British government easily obtained loans, and its army did not lack anything necessary. But there was one circumstance that made this army very vulnerable. England was not able to ensure its continuous replenishment of people. As in other wars, it made extensive use of mercenary troops. Catherine II refused to provide her with Russian soldiers, but England received soldiers from the Elector of Hanover, the Duke of Brunswick and the Landgrave of Hesse, who sold her a total of 29 thousand soldiers.
The British increased the number of their troops at the expense of the American Tories, on their side the majority of the Indians participated in the war, seeing in the colonists their more dangerous and immediate enemies. The British made attempts to increase their manpower also at the expense of the Negroes. They widely used methods of espionage, sabotage and bribery. According to some reports, the number of paid British agents in the rebellious colonies was 25 thousand. These agents supplied the British command with espionage information, organized sabotage with the help of armed detachments, conducted punitive expeditions, engaged in bribery, plotted on the life of Washington. The British also tried to bribe him. For going over to the side of the crown, he was offered an Irish peerage. High titles and life pensions were also offered to Franklin, Hancock,
Only at the end of 1780 was the betrayal of General Benedict Arnold exposed, who systematically transmitted espionage information from Washington's headquarters and was exposed by chance while trying to sell the plan of the forts of the West Point fortress.
First US Constitution
The weakness of the state power of the young republic played a significant role in prolonging the war. The negative aspects of its confederate structure were particularly acute in wartime.
The first US constitution, the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, was adopted by Congress in 1777, and over the next two to three years, all of them were ratified.



Источник: http://gufo.me/content_his/amerikanskaja-burzhuaznaja-revoljucija-33666.html#ixzz4PF91HRZ8