print view
American Revolution
boston tea party
The Boston Tea Party was not a real party.

American textbook

The history of the American Revolution begins in 1763, immediately after Great Britain won the Seven Years' War and annexed Canada, Florida and a vast territory from the Appalachians to the Mississippi River to its possessions in North America. Now the British ruled over most of the continent, but the defense of such vast territories cost them a pretty penny. Even in peacetime, the needs of the troops located in North America and the West Indies, took approximately 200 thousand pounds sterling annually. At the time, this was a huge sum. Not surprisingly, the British government tried to somehow reduce this burden. The most obvious solution was to make the American colonists pay for their safety.

 284KB
However, everything was not so simple. The most populous and economically developed part of the British possessions in America were the thirteen colonies on the east coast, from Massachusetts in the north to Georgia in the south. The local population, hardened in the fight against the Indians, the French and nature, had an enviable enterprise and skillfully stand up for themselves with weapons in their hands. At the same time, the colonists remained loyal to Britain and for the most part considered themselves British. Oddly enough, the latter circumstance became the main cause of all further troubles.

In the XVIII century. "to be an Englishman" meant, first of all, "to have the numerous rights that the English people are endowed with." The most important of these rights was considered the right to elect representatives with exclusive power to impose and abolish taxes. So it was in England itself: all new taxes were introduced by the British Parliament. The American colonies had their own taxes approved by local legislative assemblies. In 1764, the British Parliament began regularly introducing new taxes on colonists, regardless of the opinion of the colonial assemblies. The first sign was an indirect tax on sugar. It was followed by a direct tax on all printed matter, including even playing cards.

The American "British" were indignant and demanded that they be allowed to elect deputies to the British Parliament. "No taxes without representation" was the first slogan of the future American revolutionaries. A boycott of British goods began in many colonies.

However, the British parliamentarians ignored the demands of the colonists. They not only continued to introduce new taxes, but also passed several laws aimed at strangling the colonial industry, which English entrepreneurs saw as a dangerous competitor. In addition, as early as 1763, an act was passed prohibiting colonists from seizing Indian lands west of the Appalachians. The lands, however, were still captured. And the law, having no force in practice, only increased tension between the colonists and the metropolis.

This is interesting: the taxes imposed by the British Parliament on the territory of the colonies seemed high only to the colonists themselves. If the average colonist paid only six pence a year to the treasury, then the inhabitants of the metropolis were forced to fork out an average of 25 shillings annually.

From this whole tax affair, the colonists concluded that, from the point of view of the British Parliament, "all Britons are equal, but some of them are more equal." Many have also decided that it is better to be "American" than "second-class British". In 1765, a secret revolutionary organization, the Sons of Liberty, arose in several colonial cities. The American underground threatened tax collectors with reprisals, burned government archives, and even ransacked the luxurious home of Boston judge Thomas Hutchinson. The boycott of British goods continued, and it came to the point that the British Parliament seriously considered sending a military expedition to the colonies. This did not happen only thanks to the great American scientist Benjamin Franklin, who spoke at a meeting of Parliament and recalled that the colonists already sacrificed too much for the good of the empire during recent wars.

However, Franklin's brilliant speech only delayed the bloodshed. In March 1770, a mob of Bostonians, enraged by the new increase in taxes, surrounded a group of British soldiers. In the ensuing dispute, the colonists first used threats, then snowballs, and finally moved on to more weighty arguments in the form of cobblestones. One of the British was hit with a club on the head and collapsed unconscious. His comrades immediately explained to the Bostonians their deep wrong, giving a friendly volley of muskets to the crowd. As a result, five Bostonians were killed and several more were injured. The Boston Massacre case was heard in local court and six soldiers were convicted.

This is interesting: the only lawyer who agreed to defend the soldiers who participated in the Boston Massacre was one of the leaders of the revolution and future US President John Adams. Adams got involved in this case solely for the sake of the triumph of justice, putting rose his reputation and received a purely symbolic fee from his clients.

Boston continued to be a hotbed of sedition. In 1772, the American "patriots" got so bold that they burned one of the British warships. In response, Thomas Hutchinson, who had by then become governor of Massachusetts, announced that from now on all officials in the colony would receive their salaries directly from London and would no longer depend on the local assembly.

In December 1773, a truly amazing event took place in Boston. Unlike all previous outrage caused by tax increases, the famous "Boston Tea Party" happened because of the abolition of the tax on tea.

The main supplier of tea to the American colonies was the East India Company. After Parliament raised import duties in 1767, the price of tea sold legally began to bite. But tea smuggling flourished. The East India Company began to suffer losses because it could not compete on an equal footing with daring smugglers. In 1773, the owners of the East India Company, using their connections in Parliament, achieved the abolition of high duties. As a result, the prices for tea sold by the company fell by half and became even lower than on the black market.

 263KB
Boston Tea Party.
But the smugglers also had an ace up their sleeve. If English merchants could pay for the adoption of the necessary law in Parliament, then the entire Boston revolutionary underground had long been supported by the money of American smugglers. When the first ship loaded with cheap tea arrived in Boston in November 1773, the leader of the Boston Sons of Liberty, Sam Adams, organized thousands of protests and began to terrorize representatives of the East India Company.

The English merchants got scared and promised to take their tea back to England. However, Governor Hutchinson did not want to capitulate to the Sons of Liberty and ordered that the exit from Boston Harbor be closed until all the tea was landed. In response, Adams urged his supporters to "save the fatherland" from cheap tea. On the night of December 17, a mob of Bostonians dressed as Indians and sporting tomahawks seized the tea-loaded ships Dartmouth, Eleanor, and Beaver. In a few hours of hard work, the patriots threw overboard forty-five tons of tea worth almost two million modern dollars. Boston Harbor has become a grandiose teapot. Not all of the tea sank, and throughout the long winter, Bostonians went out to sea in small boats to collect the tea leaves that floated on the surface of the bay.

The East India Company nevertheless managed to smuggle several tons of tea into Boston and sell it there not without profit. Duties on tea were reintroduced only in 1778, already during the war for the independence of the colonies.

Declaration of Independence
now politicians of all kinds,

Who are not yet decided

May see how the Yankees speak their minds,

And yet are not divided.

Yankee Doodle

The British authorities reacted very harshly to the Boston Tea Party. Freedom of assembly was abolished in Massachusetts, and the Boston port was closed until the residents of the city reimbursed the cost of tea drowned in the bay. British soldiers were declared outside the jurisdiction of local courts. The Waiting Act required colonists to accommodate British soldiers in their homes without any monetary compensation.

In response, the colonists created the so-called "Provincial Congresses", which became, in fact, the provisional revolutionary governments of the colonies. Soon there was a Continental Congress, in which all thirteen colonies were represented, and committees of security, called upon to carry out the decisions of the congresses in the localities. Dual power was established in the colonies.

The population of the thirteen colonies split into three large groups. The patriots advocated an uncompromising struggle with the British for the rights of the colonists, up to achieving complete independence from the English crown. Loyalists, on the other hand, remained loyal to Britain and, like the patriots, were ready to defend their political views with arms in hand. Approximately every third colonist was a patriot, every fifth was a loyalist, all the rest made up the third large group of neutrals. The participation of loyalists in the war on the side of the British, in fact, turned the war for independence into a civil war. After the defeat of the British, 62 thousand people (2% of the country's population) emigrated from the former colonies.

The Continental Congress was subordinate to the local militia, quite numerous, but poorly trained and not able to fight on an equal footing with regular British troops. However, the militias had one important advantage: for the most part, they were excellent shooters. English soldiers, strong in their discipline and ability to conduct hand-to-hand combat, never trained in aimed shooting and fired only in volleys. As a result, throughout the war, the British chased the patriots in the hope of imposing a battle on them and defeating them according to all the rules of European military art. The Americans, on the other hand, preferred to avoid direct clashes.and bombard the British from ambushes and shelters.

This is interesting: one of the symbols of the American Revolution, the song Yankee Doodle, was written by British officers during the Seven Years' War in mockery of the clueless American militias. Initially, it was not about the "Yankee idiot", but about "Brother Ephraim", who sold the cow, and with the proceeds bought himself the rank of officer of the colonial militia. The very word "Yankee" (a corruption of "English") originally meant "New Englander". After the first victories over the British, American patriots wrote new words for the song, completely changing its meaning.

By 1775 the Continental Congress controlled most of the colonies. English garrisons were located only in large coastal cities. Periodically, small detachments of the British made sorties in order to defeat one of the rebel arsenals. In order to effectively suppress these encroachments, the patriots created special rapid reaction units, which included the youngest militias. The fighters of these mobile units were called "minutemen" (Minutemen), because they had to be ready for battle just a minute after receiving the news of the approach of the "red coats".

The first clash between the Minutemen and the British occurred on April 19, 1775. A detachment of 1,000 Englishmen was sent to Concord with orders to destroy the arsenal located there and arrest the leaders of the local militia. The Boston Sons of Liberty noticed the preparations of the British, and one of them, a craftsman named Paul Revere, got out of the city and managed to wake up all the surrounding Minutemen during the night. The next morning, when the British were just leaving Boston, the patriots were already preparing a warm welcome for them.

Birth of America screenshot, 302KB
Birth of America. April 1775 American Patriots besiege Boston. British General Thomas Gage hesitates and waits for reinforcements.
Attention is a myth: according to legend, Paul Revere, racing at full speed through the night Massachusetts, shouted: "The British are coming!" In fact, the messenger from Boston tried to make as little noise as possible and keep his trip secret.

As the British passed through Lexington, local militias fired on them from hiding. The same thing happened in Concorde. As a result, the British returned to Boston without following orders and losing almost a hundred people killed. The losses of the Americans were two times less.

Shortly after the success at Lexington, militiamen from all over New England united and laid siege to Boston. An attempt by the British garrison to lift the siege of the city on their own led to the Battle of Bunker Hill, which cost the lives of 250 British and 140 Americans.

The Continental Congress tried to settle the matter peacefully and appealed directly to King George III, but he did not want to compromise, declared the supporters of the Congress traitors and sent reinforcements to America. In response, Congress created the Continental Army, placing Virginia planter George Washington in command.

This is interesting: Washington owed his appointment to such a responsible post primarily to the fact that his native Virginia was the most populous and wealthy of the colonies. The rest of the generals were also appointed in such a way as not to offend any of the colonies.

The "Continental Army" was at first just a new sign, under which all the same militias and minutemen were hiding. Only a few years later, thanks to the efforts of European instructors and the enthusiasm of Washington, the Americans were able to create an army worthy of the name.

 270KB
US Declaration of Independence.
 18KB
Thomas Jefferson.
From the very beginning, there were many blacks in the ranks of the Continental Army, for whom entry into the military service meant liberation from slavery. The British also sought to play the Negro card by inciting slaves to revolt against their patriotic masters. Things sometimes came to the ridiculous: at the very time when the patriot Patrick Henry called on his fellow citizens to give their lives for freedom, one of his slaves was looking for this very freedom in the English camp.

This is interesting: most of the leaders of the American Revolution were slave owners. The author of the Declaration of Independence, Thomas Jefferson, lived in a civil marriage with one of his slaves and repeatedly stated that slavery was immoral, but he never freed his slaves for financial reasons.

While Washington was besieging Boston, another rebel army led by Benedict Arnold and Richard Montgomery invaded Canada. In winter, the Americans captured Montreal. However, they failed to take Quebec, and hopes for the support of the local population did not materialize.

In March 1776, the British evacuated Boston. By the summer of 1776, not a single British garrison remained in all thirteen colonies. There were no British officials left either. In early 1776, the four colonies had already adopted their own constitutions, declaring themselves independent states, or states (the English word "state" means both "state" and "state"). Two more excluded from their colonial charters (documents on the basis of which the colonies existed) everything mentioned minania about the English king. The declaration of independence of all the colonies was a matter of time. No one listened to the timid protests of the loyalists.

Europa Universalis III screenshot, 301KB
In the third "Europe" the USA becomes an independent nation exactly on July 4, 1776.
Finally, on July 2, 1776, the Continental Congress proclaimed the independence of the United States, that is, a completely new political entity, a close union of thirteen former English colonies.

On July 4, the Declaration of Independence was adopted, from which the whole world was surprised to learn that, it turns out, "all people are created equal and endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, which include life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness." No less a revelation for that era was the assertion that “in the event that any form of government becomes destructive ... the people have the right to change or abolish it and establish a new government based on such principles and forms of organization of power as they seems to be the best way to provide people with security and happiness.”

Before all the members of the Continental Congress had time to put their signatures under the Declaration (this process dragged on for several months), the British returned, landing a powerful army near New York. Now the Americans had to fight and die for their newly declared independence.

Battle for the North
The tree of freedom must be watered from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants. This is his natural fertilizer.

Thomas Jefferson

This time the British were very serious. Their army, which landed on Long Island in August 1776, numbered over 30,000 well-trained soldiers, while Washington near New York had only 20,000 militiamen. The commander of the Continental Army could only count on the high morale of his subordinates.

On August 27, the Battle of Brooklyn took place, which became the largest battle of the entire war. About 30 thousand people participated in it from both sides. The Americans were utterly defeated and lost almost 3,000 killed, wounded and captured. British losses were ten times less. Washington himself was almost captured, but still managed to evacuate the remnants of his defeated army to the mainland.

Near Brooklyn, almost half of the British army consisted of German mercenaries. True, they can only be called mercenaries with a big stretch, since these soldiers did not fight for their money. They were literally bought by King George from the German princes and went to distant America against their will. The payment for their services settled in the pockets of their overlords. By the way, King George offered the Russian Empress Catherine to sell him several thousand Cossacks on the same terms. But she sympathized with the American rebels and therefore refused.

Attention is a myth: the name “Hessians” stuck to the German mercenaries who fought on the side of Britain. In fact, among them were natives of various parts of Germany.

Having captured New York, the British commander William Howe tried to finally crack down on the Continental Army, but Washington slipped out from under his nose every time. However, before the onset of winter, the British managed to kill or capture several thousand more rebels, and Washington was forced to withdraw from New Jersey for Pennsylvania.

This is interesting: the fate of the captured rebels was very sad. It is estimated that more American soldiers died from mistreatment in British prisons than were killed on the battlefield in the entire war.

When Washington reached Philadelphia, he had only five thousand men left under him. But they were still flowers. Since the Americans were fundamentally opposed to a standing army, conscription into the Continental Army was carried out for only one year, and on January 1, 1777, two-thirds of Washington's soldiers had to go home.

However, Washington still managed to end the 1776 campaign on a positive note. On Christmas night, the Continents surreptitiously approached Trenton, where there were about 1,000 Hessians, most of whom were dead drunk on the occasion of the holiday. In the end, Washington won an easy victory.

This is interesting: before the Revolutionary War, American Protestants did not celebrate Christmas as a holiday, considering it one of the "papist things." The Hessians, on the other hand, held a completely different opinion on this matter. There is even an assumption that it was the Hessian mercenaries who taught the Americans to decorate the Christmas tree.

The new year 1777 was marked by two major British offensives. According to the plan approved in London, Howe was to march west from New York and join John Burgoyne's army moving from Canada at Albany. Thus, the British wanted to cut off New England from other colonies. However, Howe had his own plans. Appreciating the military genius of Washington the previous year, he decided at all costs to defeat the Continental Army and therefore did not move on Albany but to Philadelphia.

Birth of America screenshot, 304KB
Birth of America. August 1777 Autumn is just around the corner and Johnny Burgoyne is still poking around under Tikanderoga.
 117KB
Washington and the Marquis Lafayette at Valley Forge.
In the autumn, Howe managed to defeat the Americans at the Brandywine and occupy Philadelphia. But Washington, like a year ago, again managed to save his army from complete defeat and, skillfully maneuvering, retreated to Valley Forge (32 kilometers from Philadelphia), where he wintered. Winter 1777-1778 became the most severe test for the Continental Army. Nearly 3,000 Americans froze to death or died of illness in the Valley Forge camp. But by the spring, George Washington and the French Marquis Lafayette and the Prussian officer von Steuben, who helped him, were able to turn all the survivors into real soldiers.

While Howe unsuccessfully pursued Washington, Burgoyne faithfully carried out his part of the master plan. In June, he set out from Canada at the head of 10,000 soldiers and in July captured Fort Tikanderoga on the shores of Lake Champlain. However, that was where his luck ended.

The British had entered into a wild wooded area in which they could not exploit any of their advantages. But the Americans felt at home in these forests like a fish in water. Their hunting rifles hit further than the English muskets and much more accurately. To slow down the advance of the British, the Americans blocked the already narrow forest roads with barricades of fallen trees. Many "red coats" died, falling into ambushes arranged by the rebels. In addition, Burgoyne soon lost almost all sources of supply. In August, Burgoyne sent a large detachment in search of provisions, but he was destroyed by the Americans. Burgoyne had only 6 thousand exhausted soldiers against 8 thousand fighters of the American general Horatio Gates.

Burgoyne decided to fight his way to Albany at any cost, in the hope that General Howe's strong army (who was at Philadelphia at the time) was waiting for him there. In September, Burgoyne attempted to outflank Gates' heavily fortified position at Saratoga, but failed. A month later, he was surrounded and capitulated.

The Battle of Saratoga was of tremendous psychological significance and was a turning point in the war. The Americans, having completely annihilated the large British army, finally believed in their strength, and the original enemies of the British, the French, who from the very beginning of the rebellion secretly supported the Americans, finally decided to openly enter the war. Together with the French, Holland and Spain declared war on Britain. The Americans owe this diplomatic success primarily to Benjamin Franklin, who served as the American ambassador to Europe.

In the spring of 1778, the Continental Navy, created back in 1775, achieved its first resounding success. Such a loud name was borne by several privateer ships, poorly armed, but causing considerable damage to the British merchant fleet. The most desperate American privateer was the Scot John Paul Jones. At first, he piracy off the coast of America, but after the entry of France into the war, he went to Europe and, using French ports as bases, engaged in sea robbery in the Irish Sea, under the very nose of the British. In April 1778, American sailors made a surprise landing on the British coast and made a daring raid on the port city of Whitehaven. This was the only time in the entire war that hostilities were fought on British soil.

This is interesting: after the Revolutionary War, John Paul Jones joined the Russian Navy. Having received the rank of rear admiral from Empress Catherine, he successfully acted on the Black Sea against the Turkish fleet. In 1788, he was awarded the Order of St. Anne, but was soon forced to leave Russia because of the intrigues of Potemkin and high-ranking naval officers.

Birth of a nation
We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect Union, to establish justice, to ensure internal peace, to provide for the common defence, to promote the general welfare, and to secure the blessings of liberty to us and our posterity, proclaim and establish this Constitution...

US Constitution

 218KB
British Lieutenant Colonel Tarleton, idol of the American Loyalists.
Birth of America screenshot, 305KB
Birth of America. Francis Marion still managed to beat his sworn enemy Tarleton. True, he lost his entire detachment.
The entry into the war of France forced the British to reconsider their strategic plans. Now they were forced to reckon with the mighty French fleet. General Henry Clinton, who replaced William Howe, left Philadelphia and retreated to New York, fearing that the French would land troops in the area of ​​this city. Washington followed Clinton on his heels and, after a decisive victory at Monmouth, laid siege to him in New York.

Having lost the battle for the north, the British decided to take revenge in the south. At the very end of 1778 they captured Savannah, and in the spring of 1780 Charleston. After the defeat at Charleston, the remnants of the southern rebel army tried to retreat to North Carolina, but were overtaken chickpeas and utterly defeated by the cavalry detachment of Lieutenant Colonel Tarleton. After this battle, not a single regular American regiment remained in all the southern colonies. The banner of the struggle for independence was picked up by partisans led by Francis Marion. For several months, the "green dragoon" Tarleton drove Marion's partisans throughout the South, brutally cracking down on all who sympathized with the rebels. It was Marion and Tarleton who became the prototypes for the main characters of the Hollywood film The Patriot.

Reinforcements from England soon arrived in Charleston and a new commander, General Cornwallis. Meanwhile, the Americans had raised a new army in the South, led by Saratoga hero Horatio Gates. However, unlike Washington's army, which had been well schooled at Valley Forge, Gates' army consisted of poorly trained militias. In August 1780, Gates made the terrible mistake of allowing Cornwallis to draw him into battle in the open country near Camden. The result was the worst American defeat of the entire war. Gates' army was scattered, and he himself fled, galloping non-stop for three whole days.

General Nathaniel Green, who replaced Gates, turned out to be more successful than his predecessor. At the beginning of 1781 he led a truly amazing campaign, during which he did not win a single battle against Cornwallis, but nevertheless achieved final success. Green himself described his strategy as follows: "We fight, we are beaten, we get up and fight again." As you probably remember, Washington acted in much the same way in the north.

 210KB
Monument to the leg of Benedict Arnold.
Tired of chasing Green, Cornwallis went north to Virginia. There he was met by the troops of the Marquis Lafayette, who acted to match Green and Washington. Again failing to inflict a decisive defeat on the Americans, Cornwallis withdrew his army to Yorktown, a small port, from which he then intended to return by sea to New York.

Birth of America screenshot, 304KB
Birth of America. The most notorious traitor in American history, Benedict Arnold himself. Already in a red uniform.
This is interesting: the star-striped American banner appeared in June 1777. For a long time there was no generally accepted design, and white stars were located differently on different panels. The most common was their arrangement in a circle, invented, according to legend, by Betsy Ross, who allegedly sewed the very first flag. As for the red and white stripes, they were proposed by Washington and repeat one of the elements of his family coat of arms.

In addition to Cornwallis's army, another British detachment was operating in Virginia, led by Benedict Arnold, the same one that at one time led the American invasion of Canada. Back in 1780, commanding the American garrison of the strategically important fort West Point, Arnold entered into a correspondence with Henry Clinton, offering him a tempting deal: West Point in exchange for 20 thousand pounds and the rank of brigadier. However, the rebels uncovered Arnold's plot in time and saved the fort, while the traitor fought the rest of the war in the ranks of the British army. Now in the USA you can find only one monument to Arnold, or rather not to himself, but to his leg, which was injured in the battle of Saratoga.

All this time, in the west of the colonies, there was a bloody war between the colonists and the Indians allied with Britain. Both sides were not very humane, and the American militias often showed more brutality than the red-skinned savages who opposed them. So, in March 1782, a detachment of Pennsylvania militia slaughtered an entire Indian village, the inhabitants of which never raised arms against the colonists.

In the meantime, the war had spread not only to other parts of the Americas, but to other continents as well. In distant India, the French allied ruler of Mysore declared war on the British. The Spaniards, with the support of the French fleet, laid siege to Gibraltar and besieged it for three whole years, until the best English admiral Rodney at that time managed to remove the naval blockade from the fortress. The Spaniards and the French tried to capture Jamaica, but even here the ubiquitous Rodney stood in their way. The Spanish General Bernardo de Galvez cleared the northern coast of the Gulf of Mexico from the British, capturing Baton Rouge, Mobile and Pensacola. Somewhat later, he conquered the Bahamas. In July 1780, the French sent 5,000 troops to America, led by the Count of Rochambeau, who joined Washington near New York.

 115KB
The surrender of Cornwallis at Yorktown.
The war on so many fronts at once had eaten a huge hole in the British budget. No one doubted the final defeat of Britain, but the country continued to fight mainly because of the stubbornness of George III, who wanted to teach the American rebels a lesson at all costs.

Meanwhile, the British army in the colonies received a knockout blow. It all started with the fact that the French fleet defeated the British in the Chesapeake Bay and blockaded Yorktown from the sea. Washington and Rochambeau immediately moved into Virginia and, linking up with Lafayette's units, laid siege to Yorktown from land. Cornwallis was now opposed by 17,000 americas Germans and French, mostly experienced soldiers. On October 19, 1781, Cornwallis' army capitulated. This ended the American War of Independence. The British still had strong armies in New York, Charleston and Savannah, but they were inactive. The British Parliament, against the will of the king, began peace negotiations. Peace was concluded in Paris in the autumn of 1783, and on November 25 of the same year the last "red coat" left New York.

During the negotiations, the British completely forgot about the interests of their red-skinned allies and easily agreed to cede the Indian lands between the Appalachians and the Mississippi to the United States. Spain and France managed to regain some of the colonies lost during the Seven Years' War. American independence cost the Dutch dearly. They continued to fight with Britain until 1784 and eventually lost the remnants of their naval power.

There is no exact data on the losses of the parties in this war. The Americans lost approximately 25,000 soldiers, of which only 8,000 were killed in action. Several thousand loyalists who fought on the side of Britain also died. The British lost more than 10,000 men on all fronts, including several thousand German mercenaries. France and Spain were missing 15,000 troops by the end of the war.

 177KB
George Washington.
The war cost the British £80 million. The French spent one and a half times less, but the war brought their finances to a complete breakdown and, as a result, brought the start of the French Revolution closer.

As early as November 1777, the Continental Congress adopted the first constitution of the United States, known as the Articles of Confederation. This constitution left all power in the hands of the legislative assemblies of the individual states. However, many in the former colonies dreamed of a single democratic state with a strong central government. Such a desire was contrary to the views of the then political scientists. Ever since the time of Montesquieu, all educated Europeans have been convinced that the only form of government suitable for vast powers is an absolute monarchy. The republic was considered suitable only for small countries like Switzerland. The Americans succeeded, after long discussions and heated debates, in adopting a new constitution in 1787, which made it possible to establish democratic rule over a vast territory from the Atlantic to the Mississippi. The secret lay in a complex system of checks and balances between the various branches of government, as well as between the states and the federal center. In this attempt to refute Montesquieu, in fact, lies the notorious "great American experiment."

This is interesting: the US Constitution has undergone very few changes in 230 years. Many of its provisions, which are still in force today, are due to the political environment in which it was adopted. For example, the ban on the election of a native of another country as president was caused by the desire of the authors of the constitution not to allow one of the English princes, whose possible candidacy was very popular among loyalists, to power in the United States.

In 1783 the Continental Army was sent home. In 1789, war hero George Washington was elected the first president of the United States. Over time, his name has acquired legends. Washington's birthday has become a national holiday in the United States. And modern American schoolchildren know the biography of the first US president better than the New Testament.

With the adoption of the constitution, the American Revolution ended. American history begins.

Ten facts about George Washington
Little George Washington dreamed of becoming a sailor when he grew up.

- Washington's height was 190 cm. Of the US presidents, only Lincoln was taller.

- Of the school subjects, Washington was best given mathematics.

“As commander of the Continental Army, Washington received no salary whatsoever.

George Washington never went to college, but much of his fortune went to founding a national university.

“Washington lost his teeth very early and used dentures made of ivory and walrus, as well as human teeth.

Washington never wore a wig, but instead powdered his own hair.

“Washington had no children of his own. But he adopted two of his wife Martha's children.

- George Washington personally drew up a plan according to which the US capital named after him was built.

“As president, Washington received twenty-five thousand dollars a month.

War of Independence on your monitors
Colonization screenshot, 98KB
The Continental Congress from Sid Meier's Colonization. Benjamin Franklin sits in the center, Thomas Jefferson to his left, and George Washington and John Paul Jones to his right.
The American Revolutionary War was always lucky for good igrodelov. Sid Meier was the first to reveal this topic in his "Colonization". The game is dedicated, of course, not only to the struggle of the colonies for independence, but its ultimate goal is precisely to create a new nation. A very special role in "Colonization" is played by the Continental Congress, which arises just a few moves after the start of the game (somewhere at the beginning of the XV I in.) and representing an analogue of technologies from the "Civilization". The specific tactics of the American rebels are also reflected in the game: inferior in strength to the regular troops sent from the mother country, they get a big plus if they operate in the forests.

"Colonization" spawned many imitations. In some of them, for example in Conquest of the New World, it is also possible (although not necessary) to declare independence with all the ensuing consequences. All these games, however, had one not so good feature: if the player did not make stupid mistakes in the opening or in the middle of the game, the “war for independence” turned into a cakewalk for him. The small troops sent by the metropolis were simply lost against the backdrop of the mighty colonial legions. It had its own logic, but the atmosphere of a real war for independence disappeared completely.

Then came the era of global strategies from the Paradox company. The reenactment of the War of Independence has reached a new level. The young American state is present in all three parts of "Europe" and is forced to fight there not with handfuls of government troops, but with the formidable British Empire. In order to defeat the British, the player has to work hard - after all, he has to go into battle with what he has, without any preparation. Again, France enters the war not by itself, as in the same "Colonization", but after long diplomatic efforts, associated with considerable financial costs.

Saying goodbye to "Paradox", the founder of "Europe" Philippe Thiebaud created his own company AGEOD. The very first project of this company was devoted to the war for independence and was called Birth of America. At first glance, Thibaut's game seems like an "ugly duckling". No animation and beautiful special effects, no random events, no diplomacy, no tactical mode, not even the ability to build troops! The player, in fact, has only one way to influence the course of history, squeezed into the tight framework of scripted events - to assign the right generals to the right places, and then maneuver, maneuver and maneuver again!

Birth of America screenshot, 307KB
Birth of America. Spring 1781 Greene's Continentals and Marion's guerrillas try to stop the British rushing north.
But at the same time, the game developers from AGEOD managed the seemingly impossible. They managed to convey the atmosphere of the war for independence. How did they do it? Of course, a beautiful map, authentic music, and careful attitude to historical truth played their role. But the main thing: both sides were initially placed in unequal conditions! For the first thirty or forty turns of a large campaign, the Americans can only hide from the English hordes through the forests and swamps, without even thinking about joining the battle. The limit of their dreams is to cut out some not very strong garrison, just as Washington destroyed the Hessians in Trenton. What about balance, you ask? Tranquility ... The year 1778 comes, a good fairy appears in the form of French and Spanish troops, and an American pumpkin, ingloriously rotting somewhere near Pittsburgh, miraculously turns ... no, not into a gilded carriage, but into a strong cart, quite able to reach the final victory.

However, despite all its merits, Birth of America was very far from ideal. Its polishing lasted for many months, about fifteen patches were released that significantly changed the gameplay. In the end, AGEOD saved up money and recently released the game Birth of America 2: Wars in America, which has not yet sailed to Russian shores.

About the American Revolution with humor
A British soldier, the last to leave New York, lowered the Union Jack on Staten Island, then cut the halyards and smeared the flagpole with grease. As they sailed away, the British for a long time made fun of the torment of their former enemies, who immediately rushed to raise their "mattress". They slid, fell, and smeared themselves with grease until they figured out how to nail makeshift steps to the flagpole. And only then hung the "mattress" in place.


***

The biggest Battle of Brooklyn of the war began when an American patrol caught two British soldiers stealing watermelons from a local farmer's garden. The unlucky thieves quickly retreated, but soon returned at the head of a five thousandth detachment.


***

John Burgoyne was not only a general, but also a good playwright. One of his plays, which satirized the American rebels, was a success in the theaters of British-controlled cities. During one of these performances, American artillery bombarded the theater building. The audience, however, did not want to leave the theater even after it started on fire. Everyone thought the shelling was part of the show.


***

During the attack on Trenton, Washington's army had to cross the river under the very noses of enemy sentries. The whole operation nearly came to a head when clumsy General Henry Knox tried to board one of the boats. Washington, who was nearby, exclaimed: “Get your fat ass up, Harry! And don't sink my boat!"