
History of the Netherlands
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Template: view • talk • edit History of the Netherlands
Royal coat of arms of the Netherlands.svg
Ancient times
Prehistoric Netherlands
Celtic tribes
Germanic tribes
Roman era
Great Migration
Middle Ages
Frankish state / Franks
Holy Roman Empire
Burgundian Netherlands
Seventeen provinces
Spanish Netherlands
Rise and fall of the Dutch
Republic
Eighty Years' War
Republic of the United Provinces
Golden age
Batavian Revolution
From republic to monarchy
Batavian Republic
Dutch kingdom
First French Empire
United Kingdom of the Netherlands
The Netherlands today
History of the Netherlands (since 1900)
Netherlands in World War II
Luctor and Emergo
Flood protection in the Netherlands
Evidence of the oldest traces of the stay of an ancient man in the territory of the present-day Netherlands refers to a period of about 250 thousand years ago ( Early Paleolithic ).

During the Roman Empire, the southern part of what is now the Netherlands was occupied by the Romans and became part of the province of Belgica ( lat.  Gallia Belgica ), and later the province of Germania Inferior ( lat.  Germania Inferior ). At this time, the country was inhabited by various Germanic tribes , and in its south lived the Celts , who mixed with immigrants from other Germanic tribes during the migration of peoples that followed the fall of the Roman Empire.

In 1477, as a result of Mary's marriage , the Burgundian territory of the Netherlands became a possession of the Habsburgs.

In 1556, the dynastic division of the Holy Roman Empire brought the territory of the Netherlands under Spanish rule . An attempt to introduce the Spanish order ran into resistance from the local population. An anti-Spanish struggle unfolded under the flag of Calvinism . On July 26, 1581, the independence of the country was proclaimed, which was officially recognized by other countries after the Eighty Years' War ( 1568-1648 ) .

During the war years, the golden age of the republican Netherlands also began, a period of economic and cultural prosperity that occupied the entire 17th century .

In 1815, by decision of the Congress of Vienna, the territories of the United Provinces and Belgium were united into the Kingdom of the Netherlands under the rule of the House of Orange . However, under pressure from liberal politicians, the country was transformed in 1848 into a parliamentary democracy with a constitutional monarch. This political structure has continued to this day, with a brief break during the Nazi occupation.

Now the Netherlands is a highly industrialized country and a major exporter of agricultural products. International trade has always been central to the Dutch economy (influencing culture as well), and it was one of the main reasons for the struggle for independence, and then the growing wealth of the country.

Content 
one	prehistoric era
2	Holy Roman Empire
3	Burgundian Netherlands (1384-1482)
4	Netherlands under the rule of the Habsburgs (1482-1581)
5	Fight for independence
5.1	Republic of the United Provinces (1581-1795)
5.2	Spanish Netherlands (1581-1795)
6	Golden Age of the Netherlands
7	Period of political instability
7.1	Batavian Revolution
7.2	Batavian Republic (1795-1806)
7.3	Kingdom of Holland (1806-1810)
7.4	The Netherlands as part of the First French Empire (1810-1815)
7.5	United Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815-1839)
eight	Netherlands (since 1839)
8.1	The Netherlands in the first half of the 20th century: features of domestic and foreign policy
8.1.1	Foreign policy
8.1.2	Domestic politics
8.2	The Second World War
8.3	Postwar years
8.4	Netherlands since the 1980s
8.4.1	Lubbers government (1982-1994)
8.4.2	Kok government (1994–2002)
8.4.3	Government of Balkenende (2002-2010)
8.4.4	Rutte government (since 2010)
9	see also
10	Notes
prehistoric era
Main article: Prehistoric Netherlands

The Conspiracy of Julius Civilis  is a painting by Rembrandt depicting the oath of the Batavians to Gaius Julius Civilis , the leader of the Batavian uprising against the Romans in 69 AD. e.
The first archaeological evidence of the stay of an ancient man ( Neanderthal [1] ) in the territory of the present-day Netherlands dates back to the Middle Paleolithic (about 250 thousand years ago) [2] . The first inhabitants were hunters and gatherers. At the end of the Ice Age, the area was inhabited by various Paleolithic groups. OK. 8 thousand years BC, the Mesolithic tribe lived near Bergumermeir in Friesland . Age approx. 7000-7500 years ago (Late Mesolithic - Early Neolithic) the remains of Treintier are dated .

The wealth of the Netherlands in the Iron Age is shown by the royal tomb at Oss (about 500 BC), the largest tomb in Western Europe (52 meters wide). Many artifacts were found in the royal burial , including an iron sword with a layer of gold and coral. On the territory of the Netherlands in the Veluwe region and in North Brabant , iron balls were discovered.

At the time of the arrival of the Romans, the Netherlands was inhabited by Germanic tribes such as the Tubans, Caninephates and Frisians who settled there around 600 BC. e. Celtic tribes such as the Eburones and the Menapii settled in the south of the country. At the beginning of Roman colonization, some Germans settled south of the Rhine and formed the German tribes of the Batavians and Toxanders. The Batavians were considered good soldiers and fought in several important wars, such as the conquest of Dacia by Emperor Trajan . Later, nationalist historians considered the Batavians to be the "true" ancestors of the Dutch, and this view is reflected in the name "Batavian Republic".

Holy Roman Empire
The newcomers merged with the old population and formed the three peoples of the "Low Countries": the Frisians along the coast, the Saxons in the east and the Franks in the south. The Franks converted to Christianity in 496 . After the conquest of Friesland by the Franks, the Frisians also adopted Christianity. The Anglo-Saxon missionaries Willibrord , Wulfram and Boniface participated in the baptism of these peoples . Boniface was killed by the Frisians at Dokkum in 754 . The Saxons in the east were baptized even before the conquest of Saxony , and became allies of the Franks.

The southern part of the Netherlands belonged to Charlemagne 's Frankish Empire, centered on what is now Belgium and northern France , which also included France, Germany , Italy , and northeastern Spain . The Frisian kingdom was located in the north of the modern Netherlands . It was conquered by the Frankish state after the Battle of Born (734).

In 843, according to the Treaty of Verdun, the Carolingian Empire was divided into three parts between the grandsons of Charlemagne - Lothair I , Charles II the Bald and Louis II of Germany . The Netherlands then entered the " Middle Kingdom " of Lothair I. In 870, according to the Mersen section of the "Middle Kingdom", the territory of the Netherlands north of the river. Maas entered the East Frankish kingdom (Germany) of Louis the German, and the south went to Charles the Bald and entered the West Frankish kingdom (France).

From 800 to 1000, the "Lowlands" suffered greatly from Viking invasions , one of which destroyed the wealthy city of Dorestad . Most of the Netherlands was occupied by the Vikings from 850 to 920 . The study of the history of the state in the Netherlands begins with the fact that in 862 King Rorik of Jutland [3] was invited there , which is identified by some researchers [4] [5] [6] [7] with the annalistic Rurik , the founder of the Novgorod principality and the ancestor of the Old Russian princely Rurik dynasty. At the same time, France and Germany were fighting for control of the "middle" kingdom. The local nobility fought the Vikings, while strengthening their influence. The dominance of the Vikings ended in 920 , when the German king Henry I the Fowler captured Utrecht and deprived the nascent state of independence.

Germanic kings and emperors controlled the Netherlands in the 10th and 11th centuries . After King Otto the Great was proclaimed emperor, Germany became known as the Holy Roman Empire. The city of Nijmegen played a big role for the German emperors, and several emperors were born and died in this city. Utrecht was also an important city and trading port. German officials kept a close eye on the count of West Frisia (Holland), who then rebelled against them in 1018 . His county was to become part of Utrecht after 1018 , but due to a conflict between the pope and the emperor, it retained its independence.

Most of the western Netherlands was almost uninhabited between the end of the Roman period and about 1100 . Around 1100, farmers from Flanders and Utrecht began to buy marshy land, draining and cultivating it. This process was rapid, and the vacant land was inhabited within just a few generations. Independent farms were created that were not part of the villages - a unique phenomenon for Europe at that time. Prior to this, the language and culture of most of the people who inhabited the territory of present-day Holland were Frisian. This area was known as " West Frisia " (Westfriesland). As new settlements were created, the area took on a Lower Franconian character, and in the 12th century it began to be called "Holland". Part of North Holland, located north of Lake Ai (IJ), is still sometimes called "West Frisia".

Around the year 1000, there was an improvement in agricultural technology (sometimes referred to as the agricultural revolution), which led to a significant increase in food production. The economy began to develop at a rapid pace, and increased productivity allowed farmers to cultivate more land or become traders. Guilds were formed , and as production exceeded local needs, this led to the formation of markets . The advent of money greatly facilitated trade. Existing cities increased their population, new cities arose near monasteries and castles, and a middle class began to form in these urban areas.merchants. Population growth led to the further development of commerce and the enlargement of cities.

The Crusades were popular in the Low Countries and many saw action in the Holy Land . Relative peace reigned in Europe at that time. The Vikings , Hungarians and Muslims stopped their looting. The Crusades and peace in Europe contributed to the growth of commerce and trade.

New cities appeared and flourished , especially in Flanders and Brabant. As cities grew in wealth and influence, they began to buy certain privileges from their sovereign , including city ​​rights , that is, the right to self-government and make laws. In practice, this meant that the richest cities became partly independent republics . The most important cities were Bruges and Antwerp , which would then become of great importance throughout Europe as cities and ports.

The Holy Roman Empire was unable to maintain political unity. Other than the growing independence of the cities, the local rulers turned their counties and duchies into private kingdoms, and they owed little to the emperor, who had no real control over much of the country. A large part of the current Netherlands was actually ruled by the Count of Holland, the Duke of Gelre (corresponding roughly to the current province of Gelderland ), the Duke of Brabant and the Bishop of Utrecht . Friesland and Groningen in the north retained their independence and were ruled by the minor nobility.


Netherlands in the 14th century
The various feudal states were in a state of almost constant war. Gelre and Holland fought for control of Utrecht . Utrecht, whose bishop ruled most of what is now the Netherlands in 1000 , lost almost all influence due to problems with the election of new bishops. At the same time, the dynasties of neighboring states were more stable. Groningen , Drenthe and most of Gelre, which used to belong to Utrecht, gained independence. Brabant tried to conquer his neighbors, but was not successful. Holland tried to capture Zeeland and Friesland, but also to no avail.

In the north, Friesland continued to maintain its independence. It had its own system of state administration, called the Frisian Freedom, and resisted the establishment of a feudal system and aristocracy, characteristic of other European cities. The Frisians considered themselves allies of Switzerland , and had a battle cry "better dead than a slave". Later they lost their independence after being defeated in 1498 by the German mercenaries of Duke Albrecht , who ruled in Saxe-Meissen .

Burgundian Netherlands (1384-1482)
Main article: Burgundian Netherlands
Most of what is now the Netherlands and Belgium was united by the Duke of Burgundy in 1433. Before the union with Burgundy, the inhabitants of these lands identified themselves by their city of residence or their county, or identified themselves as subjects of the Holy Roman Empire. The Burgundian period marked the beginning of the formation of the Netherlandish nation .

The conquest of the county of Holland by the Duke of Burgundy , Philip the Good , was a strange event. The local nobility of Holland invited the duke to conquer Holland, even though he did not have historical rights to this country. According to some historians, this was due to the desire of the Dutch ruling class to unite the country with the Flemish economic system and adopt the Flemish legal system. In the XIV-XV centuries, many European countries were bled dry by wars, while Flanders lived in peace and relative prosperity.

After several years of conflict, the Burgundian dukes replaced the Countess of Holland as the country's rulers. Dutch trade began to develop rapidly, especially in the field of freight and transport. The new rulers protected Dutch trade interests. The Dutch navy defeated the fleets of the Hanseatic League several times . Amsterdam grew and in the 15th century, its port became the main place for the import of grain from the Baltic region to Europe . Amsterdam distributed grain to the main cities of Flanders, Northern France and England. This trade was important for the people of Holland, because Holland could no longer feed itself with its own grain. Due to land drainage , peat the former swamps had sunk to such a level that it could no longer be kept dry.

The Duchy of Gelre resisted the influence of Burgundy. Suffering from a lack of funds in the 16th century, Gelre did not pay her soldiers, but forced them to plunder the territory of neighboring countries. These soldiers were a great danger to the Burgundian Netherlands . A serious incident was their sacking of The Hague . Gelre was allied with England, France and Denmark, who sought to end the wealth of Flanders and Antwerp and Burgundy's power in the Low Countries .

After the death in 1482 of Mary of Burgundy , daughter of the last Duke of Burgundy , Charles the Bold , most of her possessions passed to her son Philip I the Handsome Habsburg , married to Juan , heiress of the Spanish monarchs Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile . After the death of Philip I, his son Charles V not only inherited the Low Countries, but also made the Cortes of Aragon and Castile recognize himself as king of Spain.

Netherlands under the rule of the Habsburgs (1482-1581)
Main article: Habsburg Netherlands
The total possessions of Charles V were so huge that, realizing the difficulty of managing them, in 1522 he signed off the hereditary (Austrian) lands of the Habsburgs to his younger brother Ferdinand I , leaving everything else behind. These possessions, together with the Spanish crown, passed in 1558 by way of succession from Charles V to his son Philip II . Thus, the Netherlands became part of the possessions of the older - Spanish - branch of the Habsburg house.

The east of the Netherlands was annexed to the possessions of the House of Habsburg only a few decades before the struggle for independence began. However, in 1548, 8 years before his abdication, the emperor granted the seventeen provinces of the Netherlands a status independent of both the empire and France. It was not yet independence, just a significant amount of autonomy.

Meanwhile, after the discovery of America, trade routes moved from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic. At the same time, due to its favorable geographical position in terms of trade, the Netherlands, and not Spain proper, were the sea gates of the Habsburgs, and it was the Dutch merchants who accumulated the main income from transatlantic trade in their hands. The Netherlands began to grow rich rapidly. Thousands of vans drove through the streets of Antwerp every day. Hundreds of ships entered the harbor. Portuguese, Spanish, Italian and even Turkish trading companies had their offices in this city.

Fight for independence
Main article: Dutch Revolution
The Dutch struggle for independence from Spain led to the Eighty Years' War (1568-1648). To restore order, Philip appointed the Duke of Alba as viceroy of the Netherlands , who began an exceptionally brutal repression, establishing the so-called " Bloody Council ". However, Alba's repressions only caused even greater exasperation of the population, and after a few years Alba was forced to leave the Netherlands without achieving success.


Flag of the Prince - the battle flag of William I of Orange
Seven rebellious provinces formed in Utrecht in 1579 the Republic of the Seven United Provinces, also known as the " United Provinces ". William I of Orange , an aristocrat whose descendants were all subsequent Netherlandish monarchs, led the first period of the war. The first few years were successful for the Spanish troops. However, then the advantage gradually passed to the Dutch troops, who successfully withstood the siege of the Spaniards. One of the turning points in the war was the capture of Antwerp by rebellious Spanish soldiers, who killed 10,000 civilians. This led to the flight to the north of many residents of the Flemish cities (for example, from Antwerp , Bruges andGhent ) and increased resistance against the Spanish occupation. After that, hostilities were periodically resumed for another 60 years, but the outcome of the war was already decided. The Peace of Westphalia , concluded on January 30, 1648 , confirmed the independence of the United Provinces from Spain and Germany . The Dutch have not considered themselves German since the 15th century .. The Peace of Westphalia legally formalized their independence from Germany and served to further shape their national identity. Nevertheless, attempts to establish German as the official language of the Netherlands were made until the middle of the 19th century. Karl Marx devoted a number of his early works to the problem of the formation of the Dutch ethnic identity and their separation from the Germans .

Republic of the United Provinces (1581-1795)
Main article: Republic of the United Provinces
The republic was a confederation of seven provinces ( Holland , Zeeland , Utrecht , Groningen , Geldern , Overijssel , Friesland ), and the General Lands , controlled directly by the States General . The first Stadtholder was William I of Orange. Religious freedom, its own government, trade and diplomatic activity, taxation system and armed forces were declared on this territory.

Spanish Netherlands (1581-1795)
Main article: Spanish Netherlands
Spanish Netherlands - southern provinces of the Netherlands ( County of Hainaut , County of Artois , Lille , Douai and Orshi ( Flanders ), Archdiocese of Cambrai , County of Namur , County of Luxembourg , Duchy of Limburg), who, as a result of the Union of Aras, remained subjects of the Spanish king Philip II. Charles V was also Spaniard on his mother's side, and was married to a representative of one of the Spanish royal houses. His son Philip II was born and raised in Spain. Moreover, Charles V purposefully raised his son precisely as the future Spanish king. As a result of this, Philip II did not have much attachment to the Netherlands (he lived there for only 4 years) and considered his Dutch possessions only as a resource base for Spain, a source of tax revenues for its treasury - in fact, the Netherlands was in the position of a Spanish colony. The Dutch nobility treated Philip with distrust.

Being a staunch Catholic , Philip was intolerant of the Reformation in the Low Countries, where more and more Calvinists appeared . His persecution of Protestants , tax oppression, attempts to centralize the administration, the courts led to an uprising of the inhabitants of the Netherlands.

Golden Age of the Netherlands
Main article: Dutch Golden Age , Colonies of the Netherlands
During the Eighty Years' War, the Netherlands replaced Flanders as the main trading center of Northern Europe. The Dutch traded spices in India and Indonesia and established colonies in Brazil, North America, South Africa and the Caribbean. The new nation experienced an economic and cultural flourishing. Speculation in tulips led to a collapse in the stock exchange in 1637, but the economic crisis was soon overcome. Due to all these achievements, the 17th century is called the golden age of the Netherlands . Since the Netherlands was a republic, it was not ruled by a king, but by an aristocracy of urban merchants called regents. Each city and province had its own laws and a considerable degree of autonomy. The governors of individual provinces were called stadtholders.. Usually one person was the stadtholder of several provinces at once.


Amsterdam. 1656
In 1650, Stadtholder William II , Prince of Orange died suddenly; his son, the future Stadtholder William III, who also became King of England , was born eight days later. As a result, the country was left without a ruler for 22 years. The main politician and diplomat at this time was the prominent figure Jan de Witt . During this period, there was an active struggle between the "regents" and the "orangemen", that is, supporters of the House of Orange. The regents were mainly supported by the bourgeoisie, while the Orangists were supported by ordinary citizens. The Princes of Orange again became hereditary rulers in 1672 and again in 1748. Thus, the Netherlands was a true republic only in the periods 1650-1672 and 1702-1748. These periods are called the First and Second Epochs without Stadtholder.

In 1651, England enacted the Navigation Act , which severely damaged Dutch trade by preventing Dutch ships from transporting goods across Europe. This act led to the First Anglo-Dutch War (1652-1654) . The war was ended by the Peace of Westminster (1654), which upheld the Navigation Act.

The wealth of the Netherlands increased through the slave trade . In 1619, the Dutch began transporting slaves between Africa and America, becoming by 1650 the main slave-trading country in Europe (about 1700 this title passed to Britain ). The port of Amsterdam became the European capital of the slave trade. The port was used by up to 10 thousand ships carrying slaves for many neighboring European countries.

The year 1672 is known in the Netherlands as the "Year of Disasters" ("Rampjaar"). England declared war on the country, which was joined by France , Munster and Cologne . There was an invasion of the troops of France, Munster and Cologne. The "scapegoats" in this situation were made by experienced diplomats Jan de Witt and his brother Corneille, who tried to prevent the war. They were executed and Prince William III of Orange was appointed stadtholder . An Anglo-French attempt to land from the sea on the Dutch coast was repulsed in three fierce naval battles led by the eminent Admiral Michael de Ruyter. The advance of French troops from the south was stopped only by the destruction of river dams, which caused the flooding of their own lands. With the help of friendly German princes, the Dutch repelled the attack of Munster and Cologne, and a peace was concluded with these two states, as a result of which some lands in the east were forever lost. This was followed by peace agreements with England in 1674 and with France in 1678.

In 1688, after three Anglo-Dutch wars did not reveal a winner, a crisis arose again in relations with England. Stadtholder Wilhelm III launched a preventive invasion of England, which unexpectedly led to complete success. The " Glorious Revolution " took place in England , as a result of which King James II was deposed. His daughter Mary II, wife of William III, ascended the throne, and became her co-ruler. After the death of his wife, he became the sole monarch who ruled until his death in 1702. This period was the pinnacle of international and maritime power of the Netherlands.

In the 17th and 18th centuries, many immigrants came to the cities of Holland, especially from the Protestant areas of Germany. In Amsterdam in the 17th and 18th centuries, about 50% of the population were first-generation immigrants born outside the Netherlands. Taking into account the second and third generation immigrants, as well as migrants from the countryside, it can be said that at that time the population of Amsterdam mainly consisted of immigrants. Amsterdam was relatively wealthy compared to the rest of Europe and it was easy to find work there. Migrants were tolerated because they were needed for the development of the economy, and the police did not bother them. The Netherlands also received many refugees, including Flemish Protestants, Portuguese and German Jews, and French Protestants ( Huguenots ).). Descartes was not a refugee, but still spent most of his life in the Netherlands, because he was attracted to tolerance in intellectual matters.

The economy stagnated throughout the 18th century. The position of the Netherlands as the trading center of northern Europe was weakened. Amsterdam was the largest financial center in Europe, but this role gradually passed to London .

After gaining independence in 1648, the Netherlands tried to reduce the influence of France , which had replaced Spain as the most powerful country in Europe. The end of the War of the Spanish Succession (1713) led to the loss of superpower status by the Netherlands. In the 18th century, it only tried to maintain its independence, relying on a policy of neutrality. French invasions in 1672, 1701 and 1748 resulted in a change of government.

Period of political instability
Batavian Revolution
Main article: Batavian Revolution
At the end of the 18th century, political instability intensified in the Netherlands. There was conflict between the Orangists, who sought to increase the power of the stadtholder Willem V of Orange , and the "patriots", who, under the influence of the American and French revolutions, wanted a more democratic form of government. After the Netherlands became the second country to recognize the independence of the United States , Britain declared war. This fourth Anglo-Dutch warbrought heavy damage to the Netherlands, especially the economy, and the peace agreement was humiliating for the country. In 1785, "patriots" organized an armed uprising to defend municipal democracy in several cities. This revolution took place under the slogan of "freedom" and was of a very chaotic nature. The House of Orange, with British support, called on kindred Prussian princes to help put down the revolution. With the help of Prussia, the Orangists crushed the uprising and established severe repressions: there were executions, the mayors of many cities were replaced, and Prussian troops were stationed in the country, supporting themselves by robbery [ source not specified 2139 days ]. No one dared to appear in public without orange cockades, and up to 40,000 patriots were forced to flee to Brabant or France.

Batavian Republic (1795-1806)
Main article: Batavian Republic
The corrupt and repressive Orange regime was not popular in the country. Therefore, it is not surprising that when the French army occupied the Netherlands in 1795, it met with almost no resistance. William V of Orange fled to England. The "Patriots" proclaimed a "Batavian Republic", but it proved to be short-lived.

The great pensioner of the Batavian Republic from 1805 to 1806 was Rutger Jan Schimmelpenninck.

Kingdom of Holland (1806-1810)
Main article: Kingdom of Holland

Napoleon turned the Netherlands into the "Kingdom of Holland" in 1806.
In 1806 , Napoleon turned the Netherlands (with the addition of a small part of present-day Germany) into the "Kingdom of Holland" , of which his brother Louis Bonaparte became king . This kingdom also did not last long.

The Netherlands as part of the First French Empire (1810-1815)
Main article: First empire
Napoleon decided that Louis put Dutch interests ahead of French interests and incorporated the Netherlands into the French Empire in 1810. The French occupation ended in 1813 with the defeat of Napoleon. Willem VI of Orange played a big role in the victory over Napoleon.

On November 30, 1813, Willem VI of Orange landed at Scheveningen and was greeted as a national hero. He was immediately proclaimed Sovereign Prince of the United Netherlands.

During the period of the Napoleonic occupation , the House of Orange signed an agreement with England, which gave her "temporary control" over all the Dutch colonies. In fact, this meant the end of the Dutch colonial empire. Guyana and Ceylon never returned to Dutch rule, as did the Cape Colony in what is now South Africa . Other colonies, including what is now Indonesia , returned to the Netherlands after the Anglo-Dutch Agreement of 1814.

United Kingdom of the Netherlands (1815-1839)
Main article: United Kingdom of the Netherlands
After the Napoleonic era, the Netherlands regained its status as an independent country.

In 1815, the United Kingdom of the Netherlands was formed, which also included the "Austrian Netherlands" (that is, present-day Belgium ). Prince Willem VI of Orange became the king of this united state, Willem I, thus finally establishing the monarchy in the Netherlands.

The Congress of Vienna approved the formation of a single state of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg with two capitals , Amsterdam and Brussels . The French-speaking inhabitants of the south of Belgium felt that they were deprived of their rights in the new state. There were other differences between north and south: industry developed in the south, while the north was mainly engaged in trade; the south was Catholic , while the north was Protestant . These differences led to the rise of separatism in the south and eventually to the 1830 rebellion . Belgium declared independence from the Netherlands, and after a short war, Willem Iwas forced to come to terms with it, also taking into account the possible military intervention of France on the side of Belgium. The Netherlands formally recognized the independence of Belgium only in 1839 .


Dutch East Indies . 1830
Netherlands (since 1839)
Main article: Netherlands
In 1848, a revolution broke out in many European countries. Although relative calm remained in the Netherlands, the situation abroad prompted King Willem II to agree to liberal and democratic reforms. The king asked the well-known liberal Rudolf Thorbecke to rewrite the constitution, turning the Netherlands into a constitutional monarchy.

The new constitution , promulgated on November 3, 1848, significantly limited the power of the king. The government now became accountable only to an elected parliament , and many civil liberties were guaranteed to the people. The relations established by the constitution between the monarch, government and parliament have hardly changed to this day.

Luxembourg became an independent state in 1890 with the death of King Willem III . His daughter Wilhelmina was unable to inherit the Luxembourgish throne because Luxembourgish law only allowed men to do so.

Towards the end of the 19th century, the Netherlands expanded its colonial holdings in Indonesia, deriving a large income from the exploitation of the country. In 1860, the writer Multatuli wrote the famous novel Max Havelaar, which severely condemned the cruel colonial regime in Indonesia.

The Netherlands in the first half of the 20th century: features of domestic and foreign policy
In 1909, the Netherlands switched to the UTC+0:20 time zone .

Foreign policy

Map of the Netherlands at the beginning of the 20th century from the Encyclopedia of Brockhaus and Efron
During the First World War, the Netherlands maintained a policy of neutrality, largely due to the fact that foreign trade was key to the country's livelihood. Despite this, due to the naval blockade, the Dutch government was forced to rebuild the economy in such a way as to produce most of the necessary products on its territory. At the same time, they had to keep their army in a state of constant mobilization. The German invasion of Belgium in 1914 led to a large flow of Belgian refugees to the Netherlands (about 1 million people). The First World War brought about fundamental changes in Dutch society. Due to the blockade of Germany, the supply of food and dual-use goods was limited and placed under British control. This led to food shortages and the introduction of ration cards.

On November 10, 1919, Wilhelm II (German Emperor) , who had abdicated from the throne, moved with honor to the Netherlands . Queen Wilhelmina refused to comply with the demands of the allies for the extradition of the main war criminal to be convicted of disturbing peace and tranquility in Europe.

During the interwar period, the Netherlands continued to adhere to a policy of neutrality. From 1919 the Netherlands became a permanent member of the League of Nations . In the 1920s, the  country's authorities mainly focused on England, supporting its foreign policy. Since 1930, rapprochement with the United States begins. The Netherlands were reluctant to move closer to Great Britain and France, which opposed Germany .

The rise of the Nazis in Germany caused concern in the Netherlands, but an armed conflict with Germany seemed unlikely. The government and the population believed that Germany would once again show respect for the country's neutrality. The Dutch government also rejected the offer of Germany to conclude an agreement with it, guaranteeing the neutrality of the Netherlands (October, 1937). The Netherlands was the first to recognize the seizure of Ethiopia by Fascist Italy . In 1936, the German-Japanese Anti-Comintern Pact was signed.”, which gave reason to the Netherlands to fear a possible seizure of Indonesia by Japan. In 1937, the Netherlands nevertheless passed a law to increase the army, fearing aggression from Germany. The Dutch government was forced to conclude an agreement with England on the joint defense of colonial possessions in Southeast Asia. September 1, 1939 - Germany attacked Poland, and on September 4, the Netherlands declared its neutrality.

Domestic politics
In domestic politics at the beginning of the 20th century in the political life of the Netherlands, the most important fact was the formation of a bloc of clerical parties, the Protestant Anti-Revolutionary Party and the Christian Historical Union, as well as the Roman Catholic Party. From 1901 to 1905, the clerics were in power, led by Kuyper. In 1905, the Liberals, led by Theodor de Maester, came to power, but in 1908 they had to give way to a coalition clerical cabinet led by Theodor Heemskerk. In the parliamentary elections of 1913, the clerical parties were defeated. Until the Nazi occupation, the liberals were almost constantly in power, who had to share it with the clerics.

During this period, a number of reforms were carried out:

all citizens of the country were guaranteed social security;
in 1917, all adult men were granted the right to vote, and in 1919, women received the right to vote;
The "Conciliatory" Act of 1917 summed up the debate about schooling by providing equal government subsidies to both denominational and secular elementary schools.
After World War I, social and political reforms continued.

At the turn of the century, only high-income men were allowed to vote in parliamentary elections. In 1918, under pressure from the socialists , suffrage was extended to all men. In 1922, all women also received the right to vote . After the constitution was amended in 1917, women were granted passive suffrage, that is, the right to be elected.

The Great Depression of 1929-1933 had a devastating effect on the economy and lasted longer than in most other European countries. The economic crisis has led to high unemployment and poverty, as well as political instability.

The Second World War
Main article: Netherlands in World War II
With the onset of World War II in September 1939, the Netherlands again declared neutrality . However, on May 10, 1940, Nazi Germany attacked the Netherlands and Belgium and quickly overran most of the country. The army of the Netherlands had almost no tanks and therefore offered little resistance, despite the stubbornness shown. In an effort to force the Netherlands to surrender, German aircraft attacked Rotterdam on May 14, destroying the city center with many historical buildings. During the bombing, about 800 people died, and 78 thousand residents of the city were left homeless. To avoid further losses, the Netherlands capitulated on 15 May. The royal family, most of the Dutch Navy and some military units evacuated to the UK. Impressive valuables and a large part of the merchant fleet were also taken out. Princess Beatrix and some other members of the royal family were evacuated to Canada and remained there until the end of the war.

At the beginning of the war, about 140,000 Jews lived in the country , and their persecution began during the occupation. 40,000 Jews hid from the Germans and survived as a result. Of the rest of the Jews, only about a thousand survived until the end of the war. One of the dead was the young Anne Frank , who became famous when her diary of the war years was published after the war. This diary, which she kept from June 1942 to August 1944, describes how the Frank family hid from the Nazis in an isolated part of a house in Amsterdam, and contains general reflections on the war and the persecution of Jews.

Dissatisfaction with the German occupation grew steadily, and many residents joined the resistance movement. However, many Dutch also collaborated with the occupiers, and thousands of young men fought on the eastern front against the USSR as part of the Waffen-SS .

Despite the occupation of the Netherlands itself, the government and the queen were determined to continue hostilities. Dutch units and ships contributed to the victory of the Allies, the Dutch colonies were important suppliers of strategic raw materials and food.

Japanese troops invaded the Dutch colonial possessions in the Dutch East Indies in January 1942.


British troops in liberated Holland, September 1944
The Dutch troops surrendered on March 8, 1942, and many Dutch people were forced to work in labor camps thereafter. However, part of the Dutch ships and military units were able to get to Australia , from where they continued their resistance against Japan.

In Europe, Allied troops landed in France in June 1944, and by autumn they were rapidly advancing towards the border of the Netherlands. On September 17, the famous operation of the American, British and Polish troops "Market Garden" began with the aim of capturing bridges on three major rivers in the south of the Netherlands. Despite fierce fighting, the Germans were able to hold the bridge on the Rhine in the Arnhem area . As a result, the operation as a whole failed, and in September-November 1944, the Allies only managed to liberate the territory south of the Rhine. The rest of the country, where the majority of the population lived, remained under German control until May 1945. In the winter of 1944-1945. the economy was completely destroyed, and several thousand people died of starvation. Germany signed the surrender to the Netherlands on May 5, 1945 in the city of Wageningen . After the war, the German governor of the war years, Arthur Seyss-Inquart , was put on trial in Nuremberg and executed for war crimes.

Postwar years
September 1944 - The Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg signed a customs convention in London. These acts marked the beginning of Benelux economic cooperation. After the Second World War - a change in foreign policy. 1945 - The Netherlands took part in the creation of the UN, in the same year joined the Marshall Plan. 1948 - in Paris, the Netherlands signed an Agreement on Economic Cooperation, but on the basis of which the European Economic Cooperation Organization (EECO) was created. After the war, the Netherlands quickly restored democratic forms of government. Queen Wilhelmina and members of the government returned from exile in England. A new parliament was elected, in which the Christian Democrats and Social Democrats won the majority of seats.. In 1945, the Ministry of Justice organized Operation Black Tulip, as a result of which, in 1946-48, about 4,000 Germans were deported from the country.

Shortly after Japan 's surrender in 1945, Indonesia 's islands declared independence. The Netherlands went to war to regain their colonial possessions in Indonesia. The war was not very successful, and under international pressure the Netherlands had to recognize the independence of Indonesia on December 27, 1949. About 300 thousand Dutch colonists returned to their homeland. West Irian remained under Dutch control until 1961, when the Netherlands, under the threat of a military invasion, was forced to transfer this region to Indonesia.

The Brussels Pact, concluded in March 1948 between England, France, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, became the basis of the Western European Union (created in 1954). Since 1949, the Netherlands has been a founding member of NATO and a member of the Council of Europe. The Netherlands was gradually drawn into the mainstream of pro-American politics. Agreements were signed on US financing of Dutch military production, and after joining NATO, on the deployment of American nuclear and missile bases, on equipping the Dutch army with American weapons. 1951 - The Netherlands joined the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC).

The Dutch economy developed very rapidly in the forties, fifties and sixties, in large part because the country received especially a lot of aid from the Marshall Plan . The loss of income from Indonesia had little effect on the economy. There was a severe labor shortage, and immigration was encouraged by the authorities , initially from Italy and Spain. When this proved insufficient, hundreds of thousands of immigrants were attracted on favorable terms from Turkey and Morocco . Usually, after a few years, foreign workers could obtain a permanent residence permit and invite their families to live in the Netherlands.

Suriname became an independent state in 1975, because the Netherlands themselves wanted to get rid of this colony. Hundreds of thousands of Surinamese, often with no relation to the colonialists, as a result decided to move to the Netherlands. From that moment on, only the Netherlands Antilles and Aruba remained under the control of the Netherlands , which did not seek state independence. Many inhabitants of these islands also moved to the Netherlands. As a result of mass immigration from Indonesia, Turkey, Morocco, Suriname and the Antilles, the Netherlands has become a country with many cultures and a large proportion of the Muslim population.

The 1960s and 1970s saw great social and cultural changes. Catholics and Protestants began to communicate much more with each other, and the differences between classes also became less noticeable due to rising living standards and the development of education. Just like in other Western countries, the sexual revolution came . In 1972, a directive was issued officially fixing the division of drugs into light and hard drugs, the use and possession of light drugs turns from a crime into a misdemeanor by the directive. Women's economic rights have been greatly expanded, and they are increasingly holding high positions in businesses and government. The government began to care not only about economic growth, but also about protecting the environment.

At the turn of the 1970s and 1980s, a sharp struggle flared up in the country regarding the deployment of American cruise missiles.

Netherlands since the 1980s
In the 1980s and 1990s, an approximate balance of four political parties was maintained. From 1977 to 1994, the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) and the Social Democratic Labor Party (PT) alternately dominated the country's political scene. In the 1980s, the CDA became the most powerful party and was led by Ruud Lubbers . But the PT also held the position of one of the leading parties in the Netherlands. Between 1977 and 1994, the CDA was represented in government for 17 years, along with the following parties: the PT, the liberal People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (NPSD) and the left-liberal Democrats-66 . "Democrats-66" has always been the smallest of them.

Growth rates at this time were noted in the commercial services sector: transport, banking, insurance system, telecommunications, etc.

Lubbers government (1982-1994)
In November 1982, a center-right coalition government consisting of the CDA and the PNSD was sworn in. Due to the fact that no compromise was reached on the deployment of NATO missiles in the Netherlands, the PT did not enter the government cabinet. Discussions in the early 1980s over NATO's decision to deploy nuclear missile launchers in Europe ended when the US and the USSR agreed to eliminate intermediate-range missile launchers in Europe. By the early 1990s, Lubbers' third cabinet was in trouble. The fall in the world economic situation, caused by the war in the Persian Gulf and other foreign policy events, hit the economy of the Netherlands hard, and at that time the country's economic performance was very high. In many ways, these events determined the departure of the CDA from the government cabinet in 1994. In elections in the 1990s, the CDA lost almost half of the votes cast for the PNSD. V1998 PT overtook the Christian Democratic Party in terms of numbers, pushing it to second place.

Kok government (1994–2002)
From 1994-2002, the leader of the Labor Party, Wim Kok , headed the government .

1998  - parliamentary elections. The country is in a state of economic recovery. Political debate during this period took place mainly on the issues of reducing the budget deficit, social security and the environment. The victory was received by the PT, NPSD, "D-66". Wim Kok, who led the "purple coalition" of the PT, PNSD and "Democrats-66", paid special attention to reducing unemployment, health care, youth issues, the situation of national minorities, environmental protection. Immigration policy was of particular importance. New administrative structures were created that dealt with the problems of big cities, integration policy, issues of refugees and those wishing to obtain political asylum in the Netherlands. On April 1, 2001, the Netherlands became the first country to legalize same-sex marriage. April 1, 2002Euthanasia is now legal in the Netherlands.

Election Campaign 2002 . Pim Fortuyn . The name of his party in the original is "Leefbaar Nederland" and the name can be translated as "Viable Dutch" or "Liveable Netherlands". The party adhered to the right-wing liberal direction. Due to Pim Fortuyn's statements against Islam, and the introduction of quotas for immigrants, he caused a controversial attitude. But Fortuyn created a new organization, Pim Fortuyn's List. Shortly before the election, Pim Fortuyn was assassinated.

Government of Balkenende (2002-2010)
The cabinet was headed by CDA leader Jan Peter Balkenende . He also took the post of Minister of General Affairs. Balkenende headed government offices from July 22, 2002 to October 14, 2010 . His first cabinet was not viable. The cause of the crisis is the political disagreement between the ministers representing the Pim Fortuyn List party, and everything manifested itself during the development of the country's position by the government on the upcoming EU enlargement. In October 2002 the government resigned.

Early parliamentary elections in 2003. The Pim Fortuyn List went into opposition. Numerous demonstrations and rallies in many cities against the war in Iraq.

On February 20, 2010, the fourth cabinet of ministers of Jan-Peter Balkenende collapsed due to disagreements between coalition members over the participation of Dutch troops in the antiterrorist operation in Afghanistan [8] . Labor Party leader Wouter Bos called for the early withdrawal of all Dutch troops from Afghanistan , while coalition leader Jan-Peter Balkenende insists on extending the mandate in Afghanistan for another year (the mandate expired in August 2010). In February 2010, there were 1,900 Dutch soldiers in Afghanistan. New elections were called [9] .

Rutte government (since 2010)
In the parliamentary elections on June 9, 2010, the ruling Christian Democratic Appeal party lost 20 out of 41 deputy mandates, and the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy, the Labor Party and the Freedom Party, known for its anti-Muslim views, achieved the best results in the elections . Since October 2010, the prime minister in the Netherlands has been Mark Rutte , who has led the ruling coalition formed by the NPD and the CDA. The Freedom Party supported the new ruling coalition, but did not receive ministerial portfolios.

Following early parliamentary elections held in September 2012, Rutte formed a coalition government of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy and the Labor Party.

On April 30, 2013, Queen Beatrix abdicated in favor of her son, Prince Willem-Alexander .