Kingdom of Mysore
The Kingdom of Mysore was a southern Indian kingdom traditionally believed to have been founded in 1399 near the modern city ​​of Mysore . The kingdom, ruled by the Wodeyar family , originally served as a vassal state of the Vijayanagara empire . With the decline of the Vijayanagara empire (c.1565), the kingdom became independent. The 17th century saw a steady expansion of its territory and during the reigns of Narasaraja Wodeyar I and Chikka Devaraja Wodeyar , the kingdom took over large expanses of what is now southern Karnataka and parts of Tamil Nadu to become a strong state in the southern Deccan .

The kingdom reached the height of its military power and dominion in the last half of the 18th century under the de facto ruler Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan . During this time it came into conflict with the Marathas , the Nizam of Hyderabad , the Kingdom of Travancore and the British , who culminated during the Four Anglo-Mysore Wars. Success during the first two Anglo-Mysore wars was followed by defeat in the third and fourth. Following Tipu's death during the fourth war of 1799, large parts of his kingdom were captured by the British, which signaled the end of a period of Mysorean hegemony over the southern Deccan. The British restored the Wodeyars to their throne by means of a subsidiary alliance and the reduced Mysore was elevated to the Royal State . The Wodeyars continued to rule the state until Indian independence in 1947 when Mysore accepted the Union of India .

Even as a royal state, Mysore has become counted among the more modern and urbanized regions of India. This period (1799–1947) also saw Mysore emerge as one of the important centers of art and culture in India. The kings of Mysore were not only accomplished exponents of the arts and writers, they were enthusiastic patrons as well, and their legacies continue to influence music and art even today.

Story
Early history
Sources for the history of the kingdom include numerous existing stone and copper plate inscriptions, accounts from the palace of Mysore and contemporary literary sources in Kannada , Persian and other languages. According to traditional accounts, the kingdom originated as a small state based in the modern city ​​of Mysore , and was founded by two brothers, Yaduraya (also known as Vijaya) and Krishnaraya. Their origin is mired in legend and is still a matter of debate; while some historians locate the northern origin at Dwaraka , others locate it at Karnataka. Yaduraya is said to have married Chikkedevarasi, a local princess, and assumed the feudal office of "Wodeyar" (illuminated , "Lord"), which was retained by the next dynasty. The first unequivocal mention of the Wodeyar family is in 16th-century Kannada literature from the reign of the Vijayanagara king Achyuta the Virgin of Paradise (1529–1542); the earliest available inscription, issued by the Wodeyars themselves, dates to the reign of petty chief Timmar II in 1551.

Autonomy: Achievements and Reversals
The kings who followed ruled as vassals of the Vijayanagara empire until the latter's decline in 1565. By this time the kingdom had expanded to thirty-three villages, protected by a force of 300 soldiers. King Timmarai II conquered some of the surrounding chiefdom positions and Bolu king Chamaryu IV ( lit , "The Bald One"), the first ruler of any political significance among them, a withheld tribute to the nominal Vijayanagara monarch Aravid Ramara. After the death of Aravidu Ramara, the Wodeyars began to assert themselves further and King Raju Wodeyar I wrested control of Srirangapatna from the Governor of Vijayanagara (Mahamandaleshvara) Aravidu Thirumallah – a development that brought to light, if only retroactively, the tacit endorsement of Venkatapati Raya, the incumbent king of the diminished ruling of the Vijayanagar empire from Chandragiri . The Raja Wadeyar i-reign also saw territorial expansion with the annexation of Channapatna north of Yaggadeva Rai – a development that made Mysore a regional political factor to reckon with.

Consequently, by 1612–13, the Wodeyars exercised greater autonomy and even though they recognized the nominal overlordship of Aravidus, tribute and income transfers to the Chandragiri stopped. This was in marked contrast to the big chiefs (Nayakas) of the Tamil country who continued to pay the Chandragiri well into the 1630s. Chamaraja VI and Kanthirava Narasaraja I attempted to expand further north but was thwarted by the Bijapur Sultanate and its Marata subordinates, although the Bijapur armies under Ranadall Khan were effectively repelled in their 1638 siege of Srirangapatna. Expansionist ambitions then began to move south into the Tamil country where Narasaraya Wodeyar acquired Satyamangalam (in present-day northern Coimbatore), while his successor Dodda Devaraya Wodeyar expanded further to capture the western Tamil provinces of Erode and Dharmapuri after successfully repulsing the Madurai chiefs . The invasion of the Keladi Nayakas Malnad was also dealt with successfully. This period was followed by one of the complex geopolitical changes when, in the 1670s, the Marathas and Mughals forced into the Deccan.

Chikka Devaraya (r. 1672–1704), the most famous of the early kings of Mysore, who ruled during much of this period, ruled to not only outlive exigencies, but further expanded territory. He achieved this by forging strategic alliances with the Marathas and Mughals . The kingdom soon grew to include Salem and Bangalore to the east, Hassan to the west, Chikkamagaluru and Tumkur to the north, and the rest of Coimbatore to the south. Despite this expansion, the kingdom that now made up a fair share of the land in the southern Indian heartland, stretching from the Western Ghats to the western borders of the plainCoromandel , was left landlocked with no direct coastal access. Chikka Devara's attempts to remedy this brought Mysore into conflict with the Nayaka Ikkeri chiefs and the (Raja) kings of Kodagu (modern Coorg); who between them ruled the Kanara coast (the coastal regions of present-day Karnataka) and the past hill region respectively. The conflict brought mixed results with Mysore joining Periyapatna but suffering reversal in Palupare.

However, from about 1704, when the kingdom was handed over to "Muteking" (Mukarasu) Kantirawa Narasara II , the survival and expansion of the kingdom was achieved by playing the delicate game of alliance, negotiation, subjugation on occasion, and annexation of territory in all directions. According to historians Sanjay Sabrahmanyam and Seth Madhava Rao, Mysore was now formally a tributary of the Mughal Empire. Mughul records state that regular homage (peshkash) was paid by Mysore. However historian Suryanat W. Kamat feels that the Mughals may have considered Mysore an ally, a situation caused by the Mughal-Maratha competition for supremacy in southern India. By the 1720s with the Mughal Empire, further complications in decline arose with the Mughal inhabitants and in Arcot.and in Sira , demanding tribute. The years that followed saw Krishnaraja Wodeyar I tread cautiously on the matter, keeping the chiefs of Kodagu and Marathas at bay. He was accompanied by Chamara Wodeyar VII, during which time the power of dominion fell into the hands of the prime minister ( Dalwai or Dalavoy ) Nanjarajiah (or Nanjaraja) and head of government (Sarvadhikari) Devarayya (or Devaraja), powerful brothers from the city of Kaleil near Nanjangud , who will rule for the next three decades, with the Wodeyars relegated to being the formal chiefs. The last part of Krishnar II 's reign saw the Sultanates of the Deccan being eclipsed by the Mughals and in the confusion that followed,Hyder Ali , a captain in the army, rose to prominence. His victory against the Marathas in Bangalore in 1758, leading to the annexation of their territory, made him a cult figure. In honor of his successes, the king gave him the title of "Nawab Hyder Ali Khan Bahadur".

Under Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan
Although illiterate, Hyder Ali earned an important place in Karnataka history for his fighting skills and administrative acumen. The rise of Haidar came at a time of important political events in the subcontinent. While the European powers were busy transforming themselves from trading companies to political powers, the Nizam as subedar Mughals pursued his ambitions in the Deccan and Marathas, after their defeat in Panipat, the sought-after safe havens in the south. The period also saw the French vying with the British for control of the Carnatic – a contest that would eventually be dominated by the British as the British commander Sir Air Coote decisively defeated the French at the Comte de Lally inThe battle of Wandiwash in 1760, a watershed in Indian history, as it cemented British supremacy in South Asia. Although the Wodeyars remained the figureheads of Mysore during this period, the real power lay in the hands of Hyder Ali and his son Tipu.

By 1761 the Maratha threat had waned and by 1763, Hyder Ali captured the kingdom of Keladi , defeated the rulers of Bilgi , Bednur and Gutti, invaded Malabar in the south and conquered the Zamorin capital of Calicut easily in 1766 and expanded the kingdom of Mysore to Dharwad and Bellary in the north. Mysore was now the main political power in the subcontinent and Hyder's meteoric rise from relative obscurity and his challenge formed one of the last remaining challenges to end British hegemony over the Indian subcontinent – ​​a challenge that would take them more than three decades to overcome.

In an attempt to stop the rise of Haidar, the British formed an alliance with the Marathas and the Nizam of Golconda, culminating in the First Anglo-Mysore War in 1767. Despite being outnumbered, Hyder Ali suffered defeats at the battles of Chengham and Tiruvannamalai. The British ignored his overtures for peace until Hyder Ali strategically moved his armies to within five miles of Madras (modern Chennai) and was able to successfully sue for peace . In 1770 when the armies of Maratha Madhavrao Peshwainvaded Mysore (three wars were fought between 1764 and 1772 Madhavrao against Hyder, in which Hyder lost), Hyder expected British support under the 1769 agreement, but they betrayed him, remaining out of the conflict. The British betrayal and Hyder's subsequent defeat solidified Hyder's deep distrust of the British—a sentiment that would be shared by his son and one who would inform the Anglo-Mysore competition of the next three decades.

By 1779, Hyder Ali had captured parts of present-day Tamil Nadu and Kerala in the south, expanding the Kingdom's area to about 80,000 miles² (205,000 km²). In 1780 he befriended the French and made peace with the Marathas and the Nizam. However, Hyder Ali was betrayed by the Marathas and the Nizam, who made agreements with the British as well. In July 1779 Hyder Ali led an army of 80,000, mostly cavalry, descending through the passes of the Ghats among burning villages, before besieging the British forts at northern Arcot starting the Second Anglo-Mysore War . Hyder Ali had some initial succeeses against the British especially at Pollilur , the worst defeat the British suffered in India prior to Chillianwala and Arcot, prior to the arrivalSir Eyre Coot , when the fortunes of the British began to change. On June 1, 1781, Sir Eyre Coot delivered the first crushing blow against Hyder Ali in the decisive Battle of Porto Novo . The battle was won by Sir Eyre Coot against odds of five to one and is regarded as one of the greatest feats of the British in India. This was followed up by another fierce battle at Pollilur (the scene of Hyder Ali's earlier triumph over British strength) on 27 August, in which the British scored another success, and by the flight of Mysore troops to Sholinghur a month later. Hyder Ali died on December 7, 1782, even as the fighting continued with the British. He was followed by his son Tipu Sultanwho continued hostilities against the British, recapturing Baidanur and Mangalore.

By 1783, neither the British nor Mysore were able to achieve a clear overall victory. The French withdrew their support for Mysore after the European Peace Settlement . Undaunted, Tipu, commonly known as the "Tiger of Mysore", continued the war against the British, but lost some areas in present-day coastal Karnataka to them. He later lost Kittur , Nargund and Badami territoriesto Marathas. The Treaty of Mangalore was signed in 1784, bringing hostilities with the British to a temporary and inconvenient halt and restoring others land to bellum status quo rates. The agreement is an important document in the history of India because it was the last time that the Indian power dictated terms to the British, who were forced to play the role of humble supplicants for peace. The outbreak of new hostilities between the British and French in Europe would be reason enough for Tipu to annul his agreement and further his ambition to attack the British. His attempts to seduce the Nizam, the Marathas, the French and the King of Turkey did not bring direct military assistance.

Tipu's unsuccessful 1789 attack on the Kingdom of Travancore , a British ally, was an embarrassing defeat for him, whose strength was supported by fire from a small number of defenders and led to the Third Anglo-Mysore War . Early on the British made a profit by taking the Coimbatore region , but Tipu's counter-attack reversed many of these profits. By 1792, with help from the Marathas who attacked from the northwest and the Nizam who approached from the northeast, the British under Lord Cornwallis successfully laid siege to Srirangapatna , resulting in the defeat of Tipu and the Treaty of Srirangapatna. Half of Mysore was distributed among the allies, and two of his sons were held to be redeemed. The offended but stubborn Tipu went about restoring his economic and military power. He tried to secretly win support from Revolutionary France , Emir of Afghanistan, the Ottoman Empire and Arabia. However, these attempts to involve the French soon became known to the British, who at the time were fighting the French in Egypt , were supported by the Marathas and the Nizam. In 1799 Tipu died defending Srirangapatna during the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War, announcing the end of the Kingdom's independence. Modern Indian historians consider Tipu Sultan a hardened enemy of the British, a capable administrator and innovator.

royal state
Following Tipu's fall, part of the kingdom of Mysore was captured and divided between the Madras Presidency and the Nizam. The remaining territory was transformed into the Royal State; a five-year-old scion of the Wodeyar family, Krishnaraja III , was installed on the throne with head of government (Diwan) Pernaia , who had previously served under Tipu, handling the reins as regent and Lieutenant Colonel Barry Closetaking control as a British Resident. The British then took control of Mysore's foreign policy and also demanded an annual tribute and subsidy to maintain a standing British army in Mysore. Like Diwan, Purnaiah distinguished himself by his progressive and innovative administration until he retired from service in 1811 (and died shortly thereafter) after the boy king's 16th birthday.

The years that followed witnessed cordial relations between Mysore and the British until things started to turn sour in the 1820s. Even though the governor of Madras, Thomas Munro, determined after a personal inquiry in 1825 that there was no substance to the allegations of financial impropriety made by A. H. Cole, acting Mysore, the Nagar rebellion (civil rebellion) that broke out to the end of the decade changed things significantly. In 1831, closely on the heels of the rebellion's misrule and citations, the British assumed direct control of the royal state. For the next fifty years, Mysore passed under the rule of successive British commissioners; Sir Mark Cubbon, known for his state activities, served from 1834 to 1861 and put in place an efficient and successful administrative system that left Mysore a well developed state.

In 1876–77, however, towards the end of the period of direct British rule, Mysore was hit by a devastating famine with estimated death numbers ranging between 700,000 and 1,100,000, or almost one-fifth of the population. Shortly thereafter Maharaya Chamaraya X, educated in the British system, took over the rule of Mysore in 1881, building on the success of the lobby established by the pro-enforcement Wodeyar dynasty . Accordingly, a resident British officer was appointed to the court of Mysore and Diwan to handle the Mahara's administration. From that time onward, until Indian independence in 1947, Mysore remained a Crown State in the British Indian Empire , with the Wodeyars continuing their rule.

After the demise of Mahara Chamara X Krishnaraja IV , still a boy of eleven years old, ascended the throne in 1895. His mother Maharani Kemparajammaniyavaru ruled as regent until Krishnaraja took over the reins on 8 February 1902. Under his reign, with Sir M. Vishweshwoya as his Diwan, The Maharaya set about transforming Mysore into a progressive and modern state, especially in industry, education, agriculture and the arts. Such were the steps that Mysore, made by that Mahatma Gandhi , called the Maharaya a "holy king" (Rajarishi) . Paul Brunton , British philosopher and Orientalist, John Gunther, American author, and British statesman Lord Samuel praised the ruler's efforts. Much of the pioneering work in educational infrastructure that took place during this period will serve Karnataka invaluably in the coming decades. The Maharaja was an accomplished musician and, like his predecessors, passionately patronized the development of the arts. He was accompanied by his nephew Yayachamaray , whose rule ended when he signed the instrument of accession and Mysore joined the Indian Union on 9 August 1947.

Administration
There are no records relating to the administration of the territory of Mysore during the reign of the Vijayanagara empire (1399–1565). Signs of a well-organized and independent administration appear from the time of Raja Wadeyar I, who is believed to have been sympathetic to the peasants (raiyats) who were exempt from any increases in taxation during his time. The first sign that the kingdom established itself in the area was the issuance of gold coins (Kanthirayi phanam) that look like from the former Vijayanagara empire during the reign of Narasara Wodeyar.

Chikka Devara's rule saw several reforms being made. The internal administration was reconstructed to meet the growing needs of the kingdom and became more efficient. The postal system was born. Far-reaching financial reforms were also introduced. Many petty taxes were levied instead of direct taxes, as a result of which the peasants were forced to pay more through the land tax. The king is said to have taken a personal interest in the regular collection of revenues, the treasury flourished to 90,000,000 Pagodas (unit of currency) - earning him the epithet "Nine crores Narayana" (Navakoti Narayana) . In 1700 he sent an embassy to the Orengazeb court, which awarded him the title Jug of Raja Deoand awarded permission to sit on the ivory throne. Thereafter, he established district offices (Attara Kacheri) , a central secretariat comprising eighteen departments, and his administration was modeled on Mughal lines.

During the reign of Hyder Ali , the kingdom was divided into five regions (Asofis) of unequal size, comprising 171 taluks (Paraganas) in total. When Tipu Sultan became the de facto ruler, the kingdom that spanned (62,000 miles²) was divided into 37 regions and a total of 124 taluks (Amil) . Each region had a governor (Asof) and one deputy governor. Each taluk had a head named Amildar and a group of villages were in charge of Patel . The central administration included six departments headed by ministers, each assisted by an advisory board of up to four members.

When the royal state arrived under direct British rule in 1831, the early commissioners Lushington, Briggs and Morrison were followed by Mark Cubbon, who assumed control in 1834. He made Bangalore the capital and divided the royal state into four divisions, each under a British chief. The state was further divided into 120 taluks with 85 taluk courts, with all lower level administration in Kannada . The commissioner's office had eight departments; income, mail, police, cavalry, public works, medical, animal husbandry, judiciary and education. The judiciary was hierarchical with a court of commissioners at the apex, followed by a Huzur Adalat , four administrative courts and eight Sadar Munsiff courts.at the lowest level. Lewin Bowring became chief commissioner in 1862 and held the position until 1870. During his tenure, the property "Registration Act", "Indian Penal Code" and "Code of Criminal Procedure" came into force and the judiciary was separated from the executive. administration.

After the performance Rangacharlu, a native of Chennai , was made a Diwan. Under him, the first representative Assembly of British India, with 144 members, was formed in 1881. He was followed by Sheshadri Iyer in 1883, during whose tenure gold mining at the Kolar Goldfields began, Shivanasamudra , a hydroelectric project was started in 1899 (the first such the main attempt in India) both electricity and drinking water (the latter through pipes) were supplied to Bangalore. Sheshadri Iyer was accompanied by P.N. Krishna Murthy, who founded the Secretariat Directorate to keep records and the Joint Department in 1905, V.P. Madhav Rao who focused on the conservation of forests and T. Ananda Rao who completed the Kannambadi Dam project.

Sir M. Visweshvoyeya , commonly known as "The Maker of Modern Mysore", holds a key place in the history of Karnataka. An engineer by training, he became a Diwan in 1909. Under his tenure, the membership of the Mysore Legislative Assembly was increased from 18 to 24 and it was given the power to negotiate the state budget. Mysore Economic Conference was expanded into three committees; industry and commerce, education and agriculture, with publications in English and Kannada. Important projects commissioned during his time included the construction of the Kannambadi Dam , the founding of the Mysore Iron Works at Bhadravathi , the founding of the University of Mysore in 1916, the Visvesvaraya University College of Engineeringin Bangalore, the establishments of the Mysore State Department of Railways and numerous industries in Mysore. In 1955 he was awarded the Bharat Ratna , India's highest civilian honor.

Sir Mirza Ismail took up his post as Diwan in 1926 and built on the foundation laid by his predecessor. Among his contributions were the expansion of Bhadravathi Iron Works, the founding of a cement and paper mill at Bhadravathi and the launch of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited . A man with a penchant for gardens, he founded the Brindavan Gardens (Krishnaradaya Sagar) and built the Kaveri River a high-level canal to irrigate the present-day Mendya region.

Economy
The vast majority of people lived in villages, and agriculture was their main occupation. The kingdom's economy was based on agriculture. Grain, pulse, vegetables and flowers were grown. Commercial crops included sugarcane and cotton. The agricultural population consisted of owners ( gavunda , zamindar , heggadde) who tiled the land, employing many landless laborers, usually paying them in grain. Minor cultivators were also willing to hire themselves out as laborers if the need arose. It was due to the availability of these landless laborers that kings and masters were able to carry out major projects such as palaces, temples, mosques, anicuts (dams) and tanks. Because land was plentiful and the population relatively sparse, no rent was collected on landed property. Instead, landowners paid a tax on cultivation, which amounted to up to half of all received produce.

Tipu Sultan is credited to establish a state of trading depots in various locations of his kingdom. In addition, he established warehouses in foreign locations such as Karachi , Jeddah and Muscat , where Mysore products were sold. During Tipu's reign, French technology was used for the first time in carpentry and forge , Chinese technology was used for sugar production, and technology from Bengalhelped improve the sericulture industry. Government factories were established at Kanakapura and Taramandelpeth to produce guns and gunpowder respectively. The state held a monopoly in the production of essentials such as sugar, salt, iron, pepper, cardamom, betel nut, tobacco and sandalwood, as well as the extraction of frankincense oil from sandalwood and the mining of silver, gold and precious stones. Sandalwood was exported to China and the Gulf countries, and sericulture was developed in twenty-one centers in the kingdom.

This system changed under the British when tax payments were made in cash and used to serve the army, police and other civil and public institutions. Part of the tax was transferred to England as "Indian tribute". Dissatisfied with the loss of their traditional income system and the problems they faced, the peasants rose in rebellion in many parts of southern India. After 1800 the Cornwallis land reforms went into effect. Reade, Munro, Graham and Thackeray were some of the administrators who improved the economic conditions of the masses. However, the homespun textile industry suffered under British rule, with the exception of the producers of the finest cloth and coarse cloth, which appealed to the rural masses. This was due to the Manchester manufacturing plants ,Liverpool and Scotland being more than worthy of the traditional handweaving industry, especially in spinning and weaving.

The economic revolution in England and the tariff policy of the British also brought about a major de-industrialization in other sectors throughout India and Mysore. For example, the burlap sack weaving business was a monopoly of the Goniga people, which they lost when the British took control of the area. The importation of a chemical substitute for saltpeter (potassium nitrate) affected the Uppar community, traditional manufacturers of saltpeter for use in gunpowder. The import of kerosene affected the Ganiga community, which supplied the oils. Foreign enamel and crockery industries have influenced native pottery, business and factory-made blankets have replaced domestic-made blankets called kambli. This economic fallout has led to the formation of community-based welfare organizations to help those within the community cope better with their new economic situation, including youth hostels for students seeking education and shelter. However, British economic policy principles created a class structure consisting of a newly established middle class comprising various blue and white collar professional groups including agents, brokers, lawyers, teachers, civil servants and doctors. Because of the more flexible caste hierarchy, the middle class contained a heterogeneous mix of people from different castes.

culture
Religion
The early kings of the Wodeyara dynasty worshiped the Hindu god Shiva. Later kings, beginning in the 17th century, took to Vaishnavism , the worship of the Hindu god Vishnu. According to musicologist Meera Raharam Pranes, King Raja Wodeyar I was a devotee of the god Vishnu, King Dodda Devaraya was honored with the title of "Protector of the Brahmins" ( Brahmana Deva Paripalaka ) for his support of the Brahmins , and Maharaya Krishnaray III was devoted to the goddess Kamundeswari (a form of the Hindu goddess Derga ). Wilkes ("History of Mysore", 1800) wrote about the Jangama (saint devotee of Shiva's Veerashaiva) an over-taxation uprising that was firmly put down by Chikka Devara. Historian D.R. Negaraj claims that four hundredThe Jangamas were killed in the process, but clarifies that Veerashiava literature itself is silent about the issue. Historian Suryanath Kamat states that the Chikka king Devaraya was Srivaishnava (follower of Sri Vaishnavisma , Vaishnavisma sect), but was not anti-Veerashaiva. The historian Eiyangar agrees that some kings including the famed Narasaraja I and Chikka Devaraya were Vaishnavas, but suggests that this may not have been the case with all Wodeyar rulers. The rise of the modern day city of Mysore as a center of south Indian culture has been traced back to the period of their sovereignty. Raja Wodeyar I started the celebration of the Dasara festival in Mysore, a proud tradition of the former Vijayanagara royal family.

Jainism, although in decline during the late medieval period, also enjoyed the patronage of the Mysore kings, who made lavish gifts to the Jain monastic order in the city ​​of Shravanabelagola . Records indicate that some Wodeyar kings not only presided over the Mahamastakabhisheka ceremony , an important Jain religious event at Shravanabelagola, but also personally offered prayers (puja) during the years 1659, 1677, 1800, 1825, 1910, 1925, 1940, and 1953 .

Contact between South India and Islam goes back to the 7th century when trade between Hindu kingdoms and Islamic caliphates flourished. These Muslim traders settled on the Malabar coast and married local Hindu women and their descendants became known as the Mappillas.. By the 14th century, Muslims had become a significant minority in the south, although the arrival of Portuguese missionaries checked their growth. Hyder Ali, although a devout Muslim, did not allow his faith to interfere with the administration of the predominantly Hindu kingdom. Historians, however, are divided on the intentions of Hyder Ali's son, Tipu Sultan. It has been argued that Tipu raised Hindus to prominent positions in his administration, made generous grants to Hindu temples and Brahmins, and generally respected other faiths, and that any religious conversions Tipu undertook were as punishment for those who rebelled against his rule. However, this has been opposed by other historians who claim that Tipu Sultan treated the non-Muslims of Mysore much better than those of the Malabar, Raichur and Kodagu regions .. They believe that Tipu was responsible for the mass conversion of Christians and Hindus in these regions, either by force or by offering them tax and income benefits for the convert.

Society
Until the 18th century, the society of the kingdom followed the old and very established norms of social interaction between people. Accounts by contemporaneous travelers point to the widespread practice of the Hindu caste system and animal sacrifice during nine day celebrations (called Mahanavami). Later, fundamental changes occurred due to the struggle between native and foreign powers. Although wars between Hindu kingdoms and Sultanates continued, battles between native rulers (including Muslims) and the newly arrived British took center stage. The spread of English education, the introduction of the printing press, and the critique of the prevailing social system by Christian missionaries helped make society more open and flexible. The rise of modern nationalism throughout India also had its impact on Mysore.

With the advent of British power, English education gained prominence in addition to traditional education in vernacular languages. These changes were orchestrated by Lord Elphinstone , governor of the Madras Presidency . His plan became the constitution of the central university board of institution or university in 1841. Accordingly, the high school department of the university was founded. For the transfer of education in the hinterland, schools were raised in the main cities, which were eventually raised to the college level with each college becoming the main one in many local schools ( zillaschools). The earliest Anglo-middle schools appeared in 1833 in Mysore and spread across the region. In 1858 a ministry of education was established in Mysore and by 1881, there were approximately 2,087 Anglo secondary schools in the state of Mysore. Higher education became available with the formation of Bangalore Central College in Bangalore (1870), Mahara College (1879), Maharani College (1901) and Mysore University (1916) in Mysore and St. Agnes College in Mangalore (1921).

Social reforms aimed at removing practices such as sati and social discrimination based on untouchability , as well as demands for the emancipation of the lower classes, swept across India and influenced Mysore territory. In 1894, the kingdom passed laws to abolish the marriage of girls below the age of eight. The remarriage of widowed women and the marriage of dispossessed women were encouraged, and in 1923, some women were given permission to exercise their franchise in elections. There were, however, rebellions against British rule in Mysore, notably the Kodagu rebellion in 1835 (after the British deposed the local ruler Chikkawiraruya), and the Kanara rebellion.1837. An era of printing heralded by Christian missionaries, especially Hermann Megling , led to the founding of printing presses across the kingdom. The publication of ancient and modern Kannada books (such as Pampa Bharata and Jaimini Bharata ), the Kannada Language Bible , a bilingual dictionary and a Kannada newspaper named Kannada, which Samachara started in the early 19th century. Aluru Venkata Rao published a unified history of Kannada celebrating the achievements of the Kannadigas in his book Karnataka Gatha Vaibhava .

Classical English and Sanskrit drama and Yakshagana 's native musical theater influenced the Kannada stage and produced famous playwrights like Gubbi Veeranna . The public began to enjoy Carnatic music through its transmission through public address systems set up on the grounds of the palace. Mysore paintings , which were inspired by the Bengal Renaissance , were created by artists such as Sundarayya, Alabama Singarayya and B. Venkaitappa.

Literature
treatise Sritattvanidhi declaring Krishnaruya Wodeyar III as the author]]

The era of the kingdom of Mysore is considered the Golden Age in the development of Kannada literature . Not only was the court of Mysore embellished by famous Brahmin and Veerashaiva writers and composers, the kings themselves were accomplished in the arts and made significant contributions. While conventional literature in philosophy and religion remained popular, writing in new genres such as chronicle, biography, history, encyclopedia, novel, drama, and musical treatise became popular. A native form of folklore with a dramatic presentation called Yakshagana has gained popularity. A remarkable development of the later period was the influence of English literature and classical Sanskrit Kannada literature.

Govinda Vaidya, a native of Srirangapatna , wrote Kantirawa Narasara Wioy , a eulogy of his king patroness Narasara I. Vritten in sangatya meter (composition meant to be rendered to the accompaniment of a musical instrument), the book describes the king's court, popular music and types of musical compositions of the age in twenty-six chapters . King Chikka Devaraya was the earliest composer of the dynasty. A famous treatise on music called Geetha Gopala is attributed to him . Although inspired by the Sanskrit Gita writer Govinda Yayadeva, it had an originality of its own and was written in saptapadimeter. Among contemporary poets who have left their mark on the entire Kannada-speaking region are the Brahmin poet Lakshmisa and the itinerant poet Veerashaiva Sarvajna . Female poets also played a role in literary developments, with Cheluvambe (Queen Krishnar Wodeyar I), Helavanakatte Giriyamma, Shri Rangamma (1685) and Sanchi Honnamma ( Dharma Hadibadeya , late 17th century) writing notable works.

A polyglot, King Narasaraya II created fourteen Yakshaganas in various languages, although all are written in the Kannada script. Maharaya Krishnaraya III was a prolific writer in Kannada, for whom he earned the honorific Abhineva Bhoja (comparison to the medieval king Bhoja ). Over forty letters are attributed to him, of which Sri Thethwanidhi 's musical treatise and poetic novel called Saugandika Parinaya , written in two versions, sangatya and drama, is the most famous. Under Mahara's patronage, Kannada literature began its slow and gradual change towards modernity. MudramanjushaKempu Narayana ("Casket of Seal", 1823) is the earliest work that has touches of modern prose. However, the turning point came with the historically important Adbhuta Ramayana (1895) and Ramaswamedham (1898) Muddanna, which Kannada scholar Narasimha Merthy considers " Janus as a number" of modern Kannada literature. Muddanna deftly handled the ancient epic from a thoroughly modern perspective.

Basawappa Shastri, a native of Mysore and court luminaries by Mahara Krishnar III and Mahara Chamara X, is known as the "Father of Kannada theater" ( Kannada Nataka Pitamaha ). He created dramas in Kannada and translated William Shakespeare's Othello to Shurasena Charite . His notable translations from Sanskrit to Kannada are many and include Kalidasa and Abhignyana Shakuntala .

Music
Under Mahara Krishnar III and his successors Chamaraja X, Krishnaraja IV and the last ruler, Yayachamaray, the Mysore court became the largest and best known promoter of music. While the courts of Tanjore and Travancore also expanded great patronage and emphasized the preservation of the arts, the unique combination of royal patronage of individual musicians, the founding of music schools to rekindle public interest, and the patronage of European music publishers and producers set Mysore apart. Maharaya Krishnaray III, himself a musician and musicologist of merit, composed many javalis (light lyrics) and devotional songs in Kannada under the title Anubhava pancharatna . His compositions have a literary pseudonym (mudra)'Chamundi' or 'Chamundeshwari', after the family deity Wodeyar. His successor Chamaraya X founded the Oriental Library in 1891 to house music books and also commissioned phonograph recordings of several musicians for the palace library.

Under Krishnaraja IV the art received further patronage. An excellent school of music which gave importance to the raga and the developed bhava . The Royal School of Music, based in the palace, helped institutionalize the teaching of the art. Carnatic compositions were printed and the European staff notation became used by royal musicians. Western music was also encouraged – Margaret Cousins ' piano concerto with the Palace Orchestra marked Beethoven's centenary celebrations in Bangalore. Maharaja Jayachamaraja, also a renowned composer of Carnatic kritis (musical composition), has sponsored a number of recordings by Russian composer Nicholas Medtner and others. The court ensured that Carnatic's music also kept up with the times. EntriesThe Palace band's gramophones were made and sold commercially. Attention was drawn to the "concert technology". Generous sums were spent on various instruments including an unconventional horn violin, theremin and calliaphone, a mechanical audio player.

The court of Mysore was home to several famous experts (vidwan) of the time. Veena Sheshanna , a court musician during the reign of Mahara Chamara X, is considered one of the greatest exponents of veena. His achievements in classical music won Mysore a top place in the art of Carnatic instrumental music, and he was given the honorary Vainika Shikhamani by Maharaya Krishnaray Wodeyar IV. Mysore Vasudevacharya was a noted musician and composer in Sanskrit and Telugu from Mysore. He holds the unique distinction of being patronized by four generations of Mysore kings and rulers and of being a court musician by three of them. H.L. Matia Bhagavatarwas another musician-composer who graced the court of Mysore. Considered one of the most important composers of the post-Tyagaraja period, he is credited with around 400 compositions in Sanskrit, Kannada, Telugu and Tamil under the pseudonym "Harikesha". Among violinists, T. Chowdiah emerged as one of the most accomplished examples of the time. He is known to have mastered the seven-string violin. Chowdiah was appointed court musician by Mahara Krishnar Wodeyar IV in 1939 and received such titles as "Sangeeta Ratna" and "Sangeeta Kalanidhi". He is credited with compositions in Kannada, Telugu and Sanskrit under the pseudonym "Trimakuta".

Architecture
The architectural style of the refined and royal structures in the kingdom underwent a profound change during British rule, mixing European traditions with native elements. The Hindu temples in the kingdom were built in the typical South Indian Dravidian style - a humble version of the Vijayanagara building idiom. When in power, Tipu Sultan built a palace and a mosque at Srirangapatna, his capital. However, it is the city of Mysore that is best known for its royal palaces, earning it the nickname "City of Palaces". The main palace of the city, Mysore Palace, also known as Amba Vilas Palace. The original complex was destroyed by fire and a new palace was commissioned by the Queen Regent and designed by the English architect Henry Irwin in 1897. The overall design is a combination of Hindu, Islamic, Indo-Saracenic and Moorish styles, which for the first time in India, used cast iron columns and roof structures. A striking feature of the exterior are the granite columns that support the pointed arches on the portico, a tall tower whose decoration is a gilded dome with a parasol (chattri) on it and clusters of other domes around it. The interior is richly decorated with marble-effect walls and teakwood ceilings with sculptures of Hindu deities. Reception hallleads to an inner private hall through silver doors. This rich room has floor planels that are inlaid with semi-precious stones and a stained glass roof supported centrally by columns and arches. The Marriage Hall (Kalyana mantapa) in the palace complex is known for its stained glass octagonal dome with peacock motifs.

Lalita Mahal Palace was built in 1921 by E.W. Fritschli under commission by Mahara Krishnar IV. The architectural style is called "Renaissance" and features concepts from English castles and Italian palazzos. The central dome is believed to be modeled on St. Paul 's Cathedral in London. Other notable features are the Italian marble staircase, polished wood flooring on the banquet and dance halls, and Belgian crystal lamps. The Jaganmohan Palace was commissioned in 1861 and was completed in 1910. The three-story building with attractive domes, ornaments and domes was the site of many royal celebrations. It is now called the Chamarajendra Art Gallery and houses a rich collection of artefacts.

The Mysore campus , also named "Manasa Gangotri", is home to several architecturally interesting buildings. Some of them are in European style and were completed at the end of the 19th century. These include the Yayalakhmi Vilas mansion , Crawford Hall, the Oriental Research Institute (built between 1887 and 1891) with its Ionic and Corinthian columns and district offices ( Athara Kutchery , 1887). Athara Kutchery, which originally served as the British Commissioner's office, has an octagonal dome and decoration that adds to its beauty. The summer palace of the maharaja, built in 1880, is called Lokaranjan Mahal, and originally serves as a school for royalty. Palace of Rajendra Vilas, built in the British Indo style on Chamundi Hill , was commissioned in 1922 and completed in 1938 by Mahara Krishnar IV. Other royal mansions built by the rulers of Mysore were the Chittaranjan Mahal in Mysore and the Bangalore Palace in Bangalore, a structure based on the lines of England's Windsor Castle . The Central Food Institute of Technical Research (Cheluvamba Mansion), built in the baroque European renaissance style, was once the residence of Princess Cheluvambamani Avaru, sister of Mahara Krishnar IV. His extensive pilaster work and mosaic flooring are remarkable.

Most famous among the many temples built by the Wodeyars is the Chamundeshwari Temple on Chamundi Hill . The earliest structure here was dedicated in the 12th century and was later patronized by the rulers of Mysore. Maharaya Krishnaray III added the Dravidian gopuram style in 1827. The temple has silver plated doors with images of deities. Other images include those of the Hindu god Ganeshaand Mahara Krishnar III with his three queens. Surrounding the main palace in Mysore and in the fort are five temples built in different periods. Prasanna Krishnaswamy Temple (1829), Lakshmiramana Swamy Temple whose earliest structures date to 1499, Trinesvara Swamy Temple (late 16th century), Shweta Varaha Swamy Temple built by Purnaiah with a light Hoysala style of architecture, Prasanna Venkataramana Swami Temple (1836 listen)) famous for 12 frescoes of Wodeyar rulers. Notable temples near the city of Mysore are the yalets ("mythical animal") pillared Venkataramana Temple built in the late 17th century at the Bangalore fort and the Ranganatha temple at Srirangapatna.

Tipu Sultan built a wooden colonnaded palace called the Dariya Daulat ( lit , "garden of wealth of the sea") Palace at Srirangapatna in 1784. Built in the Indo-Saracenic style, the palace is known for its intricate woodwork consisting of ornate arches, striped columns, and floral designs. and paintings. The western wall of the palace is covered with frescoes depicting Tipu Sultan's victory over Colonel Bailey's army at Pollilur near Kanchipuram .in 1780. One fresco shows Tip enjoying the scent of a bouquet of flowers while a battle is going on. In that painting, the mustaches of the French soldiers distinguish them from the clean-shaven British soldiers. Also in Srirangapatna is the Gumbaz mausoleum built by Tipu Sultan in 1784. It houses the tombs of Tipu and Hyder Ali. The granite base is topped with a dome built of brick and pilaster.

military technology
Iron-rimmed first and metal-cylinder rocket artillery were developed by Tipu Sultan and his father Hyder Ali in the 1780s. He successfully used these metal cylinder rockets against the larger British East India Company forces during the Anglo-Mysore Wars . The Mysore rockets of this period were much more advanced than what the British had seen, mainly due to the use of iron tubes to contain the fuel; this allowed higher thrust and longer range for rocket (to range). After Tipu's eventual defeat during the Fourth Anglo-Mysore Warand the capture of Mysore's iron rockets, they were influential in British rocket development, inspiring the Congreve rocket which was soon put into use during the Napoleonic Wars .

According to Stephen Oliver and John F. Gilmartin Jr. in the Encyclopædia Britannica (2008):