Independence Day (United States)
"Fourth of July" and "4th of July" redirect here. For the date, see July 4. For other uses, see Independence Day (disambiguation). For other related material, see Fourth of July (disambiguation).
Independence Day
Fourth of July fireworks behind the Washington Monument, 1986.jpg
Displays of fireworks, such as these over the Washington Monument in 1986, take place across the United States on Independence Day.
Also called	The Fourth of July
Observed by	United States
Type	National
Significance	The day in 1776 that the Declaration of Independence was adopted by the Continental Congress
Celebrations	Fireworks, family reunions, concerts, barbecues, picnics, parades, baseball games
Date	July 4
Next time	July 4, 2018
Frequency	Annual
Independence Day, also referred to as the Fourth of July or July Fourth, is a federal holiday in the United States commemorating the adoption of the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776. The Continental Congress declared that the thirteen American colonies regarded themselves as a new nation, the United States of America, and were no longer part of the British Empire.[1] The Congress actually voted to declare independence two days earlier, on July 2.[1]

Independence Day is commonly associated with fireworks, parades, barbecues, carnivals, fairs, picnics, concerts, baseball games, family reunions, and political speeches and ceremonies, in addition to various other public and private events celebrating the history, government, and traditions of the United States. Independence Day is the National Day of the United States.[2][3][4]

Contents
1	Background
2	Observance
3	Customs
4	Celebration gallery
5	Notable celebrations
6	Other countries
7	See also
8	References
9	Further reading
10	External links
Background
During the American Revolution, the legal separation of the Thirteen Colonies from Great Britain in 1776 actually occurred on July 2, when the Second Continental Congress voted to approve a resolution of independence that had been proposed in June by Richard Henry Lee of Virginia declaring the United States independent from Great Britain rule.[5][6] After voting for independence, Congress turned its attention to the Declaration of Independence, a statement explaining this decision, which had been prepared by a Committee of Five, with Thomas Jefferson as its principal author. Congress debated and revised the wording of the Declaration, finally approving it two days later on July 4. A day earlier, John Adams had written to his wife Abigail:

The second day of July, 1776, will be the most memorable epoch in the history of America. I am apt to believe that it will be celebrated by succeeding generations as the great anniversary festival. It ought to be commemorated as the day of deliverance, by solemn acts of devotion to God Almighty. It ought to be solemnized with pomp and parade, with shows, games, sports, guns, bells, bonfires, and illuminations, from one end of this continent to the other, from this time forward forever more.[7]

Adams's prediction was off by two days. From the outset, Americans celebrated independence on July 4, the date shown on the much-publicized Declaration of Independence, rather than on July 2, the date the resolution of independence was approved in a closed session of Congress.[8]

Historians have long disputed whether members of Congress signed the Declaration of Independence on July 4, even though Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and Benjamin Franklin all later wrote that they had signed it on that day. Most historians have concluded that the Declaration was signed nearly a month after its adoption, on August 2, 1776, and not on July 4 as is commonly believed.[9][10][11][12][13]

Coincidentally, both John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, the only signers of the Declaration of Independence later to serve as Presidents of the United States, died on the same day: July 4, 1826, which was the 50th anniversary of the Declaration. Although not a signer of the Declaration of Independence, James Monroe, another Founding Father who was elected as President, also died on July 4, 1831. He was the third President in a row who died on the anniversary of independence. Calvin Coolidge, the 30th President, was born on July 4, 1872; so far he is the only U.S. President to have been born on Independence Day.

Observance
In 1777, thirteen gunshots were fired in salute, once at morning and once again as evening fell, on July 4 in Bristol, Rhode Island. Philadelphia celebrated the first anniversary in a manner a modern American would find familiar: an official dinner for the Continental Congress, toasts, 13-gun salutes, speeches, prayers, music, parades, troop reviews, and fireworks. Ships in port were decked with red, white, and blue bunting.[14]
In 1778, from his headquarters at Ross Hall, near New Brunswick, New Jersey, General George Washington marked July 4 with a double ration of rum for his soldiers and an artillery salute (feu de joie). Across the Atlantic Ocean, ambassadors John Adams and Benjamin Franklin held a dinner for their fellow Americans in Paris, France.[15]

American children of many ethnic backgrounds celebrate noisily in 1902 Puck cartoon
In 1779, July 4 fell on a Sunday. The holiday was celebrated on Monday, July 5.[15]
In 1781, the Massachusetts General Court became the first state legislature to recognize July 4 as a state celebration.[15]
In 1783, Moravians in Salem, North Carolina, held a celebration of July 4 with a challenging music program assembled by Johann Friedrich Peter. This work was titled The Psalm of Joy. This is recognized as the first recorded celebration[clarification needed] and is still celebrated there today.[16]
In 1870, the U.S. Congress made Independence Day an unpaid holiday for federal employees.[17]
In 1938, Congress changed Independence Day to a paid federal holiday.[18]
Customs

An 1825 invitation to an Independence Day celebration

Fireworks on Independence Day in Goleta, California.
Independence Day is a national holiday marked by patriotic displays. Similar to other summer-themed events, Independence Day celebrations often take place outdoors. Independence Day is a federal holiday, so all non-essential federal institutions (such as the postal service and federal courts) are closed on that day. Many politicians make it a point on this day to appear at a public event to praise the nation's heritage, laws, history, society, and people.

Families often celebrate Independence Day by hosting or attending a picnic or barbecue; many take advantage of the day off and, in some years, a long weekend to gather with relatives or friends. Decorations (e.g., streamers, balloons, and clothing) are generally colored red, white, and blue, the colors of the American flag. Parades are often held in the morning, before family get-togethers, while fireworks displays occur in the evening after dark at such places as parks, fairgrounds, or town squares.

The night before the Fourth was once the focal point of celebrations, marked by raucous gatherings often incorporating bonfires as their centerpiece. In New England, towns competed to build towering pyramids, assembled from barrels and casks. They were lit at nightfall, to usher in the celebration. The highest were in Salem, Massachusetts (on Gallows Hill, the famous site of the execution of 13 women and 6 men for witchcraft in 1692 during the Salem witch trials), where the tradition of celebratory bonfires had persisted, with pyramids composed of as many as forty tiers of barrels. These made the tallest bonfires ever recorded. The custom flourished in the 19th and 20th centuries, and is still practiced in some New England towns.[19]

Independence Day fireworks are often accompanied by patriotic songs such as the national anthem "The Star-Spangled Banner,", "God Bless America,", "America the Beautiful," "My Country, 'Tis of Thee," "This Land Is Your Land," "Stars and Stripes Forever," and, regionally, "Yankee Doodle" in northeastern states and "Dixie" in southern states. Some of the lyrics recall images of the Revolutionary War or the War of 1812.


Independence Day Parade in Washington, D.C.
Firework shows are held in many states, and many fireworks are sold for personal use or as an alternative to a public show. Safety concerns have led some states to ban fireworks or limit the sizes and types allowed. In addition, local and regional weather conditions may dictate whether the sale or use of fireworks in an area will be allowed. Some local or regional firework sales are limited or prohibited because of dry weather or other specific concerns. On these occasions the public may be prohibited from purchasing or discharging fireworks, but professional displays (such as those at sports events) may still take place, if certain safety precautions have been taken.

A salute of one gun for each state in the United States, called a "salute to the union," is fired on Independence Day at noon by any capable military base.[20]

In 2009, New York City had the largest fireworks display in the country, with more than 22 tons of pyrotechnics exploded.[21] It generally holds displays in the East River. Other major displays are in Chicago on Lake Michigan; in San Diego over Mission Bay; in Boston on the Charles River; in St. Louis on the Mississippi River; in San Francisco over the San Francisco Bay; and on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.

During the annual Windsor-Detroit International Freedom Festival, Detroit, Michigan hosts one of the world's largest fireworks displays, over the Detroit River, to celebrate Independence Day in conjunction with Windsor, Ontario's celebration of Canada Day.

The first week of July is typically one of the busiest United States travel periods of the year, as many people use what is often a three-day holiday weekend for extended vacation trips.[22]

Celebration gallery

In addition to a fireworks show, Miami, Florida lights one of its tallest buildings with the patriotic red, white and blue color scheme on Independence Day

 

New York City's fireworks display, shown above over the East Village, is sponsored by Macy's and is the largest[21] in the country

 
File:Independence Day, 1940 Promotion.ogvPlay media
Patriotic trailer shown in theaters celebrating July 4, 1940

 

A festively decorated Independence day cake.

 

Lakes are a popular destination for Fourth of July celebrations in the midwest.

Notable celebrations

Originally entitled Yankee Doodle, this is one of several versions of a scene painted by A. M. Willard that came to be known as The Spirit of '76. Often imitated or parodied, it is a familiar symbol of American patriotism
Held since 1785, the Bristol Fourth of July Parade in Bristol, Rhode Island is the oldest continuous Independence Day celebration in the United States.
Since 1868, Seward, Nebraska has held a celebration on the same town square. In 1979 Seward was designated "America's Official Fourth of July City-Small Town USA" by resolution of Congress. Seward has also been proclaimed "Nebraska's Official Fourth of July City" by Governor James Exon in proclamation. Seward is a town of 6,000 but swells to 40,000+ during the July 4 celebrations.[23]
Since 1912, the Rebild Society, a Danish-American friendship organization, has held a July 4 weekend festival that serves as a homecoming for Danish-Americans in the Rebild municipality of Denmark.[24]
Since 1959, the International Freedom Festival is jointly held in Detroit, Michigan and Windsor, Ontario during the last week of June each year as a mutual celebration of Independence Day and Canada Day (July 1). It culminates in a large fireworks display over the Detroit River.
The famous Macy's fireworks display usually held over the East River in New York City has been televised nationwide on NBC since 1976. In 2009, the fireworks display was returned to the Hudson River for the first time since 2000 to commemorate the 400th anniversary of Henry Hudson's exploration of that river.[25]
The Boston Pops Orchestra has hosted a music and fireworks show over the Charles River Esplanade called the "Boston Pops Fireworks Spectacular" annually since 1973.[26] The event was broadcast nationally from 1991 until 2002 on A&E, and since 2002 by CBS and its Boston station WBZ-TV. WBZ/1030 and WBZ-TV broadcast the entire event locally, and from 2002 through 2012, CBS broadcast the final hour of the concert nationally in primetime. The national broadcast was put on hiatus beginning in 2013, which Pops executive producer David G. Mugar believed was the result of decreasing viewership caused by NBC's encore presentation of the Macy's fireworks.[27][28] The national broadcast will be revived for 2016, and expanded to two hours.[29]
On the Capitol lawn in Washington, D.C., A Capitol Fourth, a free concert broadcast live by PBS, NPR and the American Forces Network, precedes the fireworks and attracts over half a million people annually.
Other countries
The Philippines celebrates July 4 as its Republic Day to commemorate that day in 1946 when it ceased to be a U.S. territory and the United States officially recognized Philippine Independence.[30] July 4 was intentionally chosen by the United States because it corresponds to its Independence Day, and this day was observed in the Philippines as Independence Day until 1962. In 1964, the name of the July 4 holiday was changed to Republic Day. In Rwanda, July 4 is an official holiday known as Liberation Day, commemorating the end of the 1994 Rwandan Genocide in which the U.S. government also played a role. Rebild National Park in Denmark is said to hold the largest July 4 celebrations outside of the United States.[31]

See also
icon	Holidays portal
	United States portal
1776 (musical)
Constitution Day (United States)
To the Fourth of July (1898), poem
"What to a slave is the 4th of July?" – 1852 Frederick Douglass speech
References
 "What is Independence Day in USA?". Tech Notes. July 2, 2015. Retrieved July 2, 2015.
 "National Days of Countries". Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. New Zealand. Retrieved June 28, 2009.
 Central Intelligence Agency. "National Holiday". The World Factbook. Retrieved June 28, 2009.
 "National Holiday of Member States". United Nations. Retrieved June 28, 2009.
 Becker, p. 3.
 Staff writer (July 1, 1917). "How Declaration of Independence was Drafted" (PDF). New York Times. Retrieved November 20, 2009. On the following day, when the formal vote of Congress was taken, the resolutions were approved by twelve Colonies–all except New York. The original Colonies, therefore, became the United States of America on July 2, 1776.
 "Letter from John Adams to Abigail Adams, 3 July 1776, 'Had a Declaration…'". Adams Family Papers. Massachusetts Historical Society. Retrieved June 28, 2009.
 Maier, Pauline (August 7, 1997). "Making Sense of the Fourth of July". American Heritage. Retrieved June 28, 2009.
 Burnett, Edward Cody (1941). The Continental Congress. New York: W.W. Norton. pp. 191–96. ISBN 1104991853.
 Warren, Charles (July 1945). "Fourth of July Myths". William and Mary Quarterly. 3d. 2 (3): 238–272.
 "Top 5 Myths About the Fourth of July!". History News Network. George Mason University. June 30, 2001. Retrieved June 28, 2009.
 Becker, pp. 184–85.
 For the minority scholarly argument that the Declaration was signed on July 4, see Wilfred J. Ritz, "The Authentication of the Engrossed Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776", Law and History Review 4, no. 1 (Spring 1986): 179–204, via JSTOR.
 Heintze, "The First Celebrations".
 Heintze, "A Chronology of Notable Fourth of July Celebration Occurrences".
 [1] Archived July 22, 2013, at the Wayback Machine.
 Heintze, "How the Fourth of July was Designated as an 'Official' Holiday".
 Heintze, "Federal Legislation Establishing the Fourth of July Holiday".
 "The Night Before the Fourth". The Atlantic. July 1, 2011. Retrieved November 4, 2011.
 "Origin of the 21-Gun Salute". U.S. Army Center of Military History. October 3, 2003. Retrieved July 4, 2014.
 Biggest fireworks show in U.S. lights up sky, USA Today, July 2009.
 "AAA Chicago Projects Increase in Fourth of July Holiday Travelers", PR Newswire, 23 June 2010
 "History of Seward Nebraska 4th of July".
 "History". Rebild Society. Rebild National Park Society. Retrieved June 30, 2009.
 "2009 Macy's 4th of July Fireworks". Federated Department Stores. April 29, 2009. Retrieved July 4, 2009.
 "Welcome to Boston's 4th of July Celebration". Boston 4 Celebrations Foundation. 2009. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008. Retrieved July 4, 2009.
 James H. Burnett III. Boston gets a nonreality show: CBS broadcasts impossible views of 4th fireworks. Boston Globe, July 8, 2011
 Powers, Martine; Moskowitz, Eric (June 15, 2013). "July 4 fireworks gala loses its national pop". The Boston Globe. Retrieved June 16, 2013.
 "With CBS on board again, Keith Lockhart is ready to take over prime time". Boston Herald. Retrieved July 2, 2016.
 Philippine Republic Day, Official Gazette (Philippines), retrieved July 5, 2012
 Lindsey Galloway (Jul 3, 2012). "Celebrate American independence in Denmark".
Further reading
Becker, Carl L. (1922). The Declaration of Independence: A Study in the History of Political Ideas. New York: Harcourt, Brace. ISBN 0-394-70060-0. Retrieved June 28, 2009.
Criblez, Adam (2013). Parading Patriotism: Independence Day Celebrations in the Urban Midwest, 1826–1876. DeKalb, IL: Northern Illinois University Press.
Heintze, James R. "Fourth of July Celebrations Database". American University of Washington, D.C. Retrieved February 10, 2015.
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Independence Day (United States).
Fourth of July Is Independence Day USA.gov, July 4, 2014
U.S. Independence Day a Civic and Social Event U.S. State Department, June 22, 2010
The Meaning of July Fourth for the Negro by Frederick Douglass
Fourth of July Orations Collection at the Division of Special Collections, Archives, and Rare Books, Ellis Library, University of Missouri
The Fourth of July, Back in the Day – slideshow by Life magazine
Fourth of July 2015 Fireworks in New York City on Youtube


v
t
e
United States Federal holidays in the United States
Current	
New Year's Day
Birthday of Martin Luther King Jr.
Washington's Birthday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Former	
The Eighth (1828–1861)
Victory Day (1948–1975)
Proposed	
Flag Day (1950)
Election Day (1993)
Malcolm X Day (1993–1994)
Democracy Day (2005, 2014)
Cesar Chavez Day (2008)
Susan B. Anthony Day (2011)
Native American Day (2013)
v
t
e
United States Holidays, observances, and celebrations in the United States
January	
New Year's Day (federal)
Martin Luther King Jr. Day (federal)
Confederate Heroes Day (TX)
Fred Korematsu Day (CA, FL, HI, VA)
Idaho Human Rights Day (ID)
Inauguration Day (federal quadrennial, DC area)
Kansas Day (KS)
Lee–Jackson Day (formerly Lee–Jackson–King Day) (VA)
Robert E. Lee Day (FL, GA)
Stephen Foster Memorial Day (36)
The Eighth (LA, former federal)
January–February	
Super Bowl Sunday
February
American Heart Month
Black History Month	
Washington's Birthday/Presidents' Day (federal)
Valentine's Day
Georgia Day (GA)
Groundhog Day
Lincoln's Birthday (CA, CT, IL, IN, MO, NJ, NY, WV)
National Girls and Women in Sports Day
National Freedom Day (36)
Primary Election Day (WI)
Ronald Reagan Day (CA)
Rosa Parks Day (CA, MO)
Susan B. Anthony Day (CA, FL, NY, WI, WV, proposed federal)
February–March	
Mardi Gras
Ash Wednesday (religious)
Courir de Mardi Gras (religious)
Super Tuesday
March
Irish-American Heritage Month
National Colon Cancer Awareness Month
Women's History Month	
St. Patrick's Day (religious)
Spring break (week)
Casimir Pulaski Day (IL)
Cesar Chavez Day (CA, CO, TX, proposed federal)
Evacuation Day (Suffolk County, MA)
Harriet Tubman Day (NY)
Holi (NY, religious)
Mardi Gras (AL (in two counties), LA)
Maryland Day (MD)
National Poison Prevention Week (week)
Prince Jonah Kūhiō Kalanianaʻole Day (HI)
Saint Joseph's Day (religious)
Seward's Day (AK)
Texas Independence Day (TX)
Town Meeting Day (VT)
March–April	
Easter (religious)
Palm Sunday (religious)
Passover (religious)
Good Friday (CT, NC, PR, religious)
Easter Monday (religious)
April
Confederate History Month	
420 Day
April Fools' Day
Arbor Day
Confederate Memorial Day (AL, FL, MS, SC)
Days of Remembrance of the Victims of the Holocaust (week)
Earth Day
Emancipation Day (DC)
Thomas Jefferson's Birthday (AL)
Pascua Florida (FL)
Patriots' Day (MA, ME)
San Jacinto Day (TX)
Siblings Day
Walpurgis Night (religious)
May
Asian Pacific American Heritage Month
Jewish American Heritage Month	
Memorial Day (federal)
Mother's Day (36)
Cinco de Mayo
Harvey Milk Day (CA)
Law Day (36)
Loyalty Day (36)
Malcolm X Day (CA, IL, proposed federal)
May Day
Military Spouse Day
National Day of Prayer (36)
National Defense Transportation Day (36)
National Maritime Day (36)
Peace Officers Memorial Day (36)
Truman Day (MO)
June
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and
Transgender Pride Month	
Father's Day (36)
Bunker Hill Day (Suffolk County, MA)
Carolina Day (SC)
Emancipation Day In Texas / Juneteenth (TX)
Flag Day (36, proposed federal)
Helen Keller Day (PA)
Honor America Days (3 weeks)
Jefferson Davis Day (AL, FL)
Kamehameha Day (HI)
Odunde Festival (Philadelphia, PA)
Senior Week (week)
West Virginia Day (WV)
July	
Independence Day (federal)
Lā Hoʻihoʻi Ea (HI, unofficial)
Parents' Day (36)
Pioneer Day (UT)
July–August	
Summer vacation
August	
American Family Day (AZ)
Bennington Battle Day (VT)
Hawaii Admission Day / Statehood Day (HI)
Lyndon Baines Johnson Day (TX)
National Aviation Day (36)
Service Reduction Day (MD)
Victory over Japan Day (RI, former federal)
Women's Equality Day (36)
September
Prostate Cancer Awareness Month	
Labor Day (federal)
California Admission Day (CA)
Carl Garner Federal Lands Cleanup Day (36)
Constitution Day (36)
Constitution Week (week)
Defenders Day (MD)
Gold Star Mother's Day (36)
National Grandparents Day (36)
National Payroll Week (week)
Native American Day (CA, TN, proposed federal)
Patriot Day (36)
September–October
Hispanic Heritage Month	
Oktoberfest
Rosh Hashanah (religious)
Yom Kippur (religious)
October
Breast Cancer Awareness Month
Disability Employment Awareness Month
Filipino American History Month
LGBT History Month	
Columbus Day (federal)
Halloween
Alaska Day (AK)
Child Health Day (36)
General Pulaski Memorial Day
German-American Day
Indigenous Peoples' Day (VT)
International Day of Non-Violence
Leif Erikson Day (36)
Missouri Day (MO)
National School Lunch Week
Native American Day (SD)
Nevada Day (NV)
Sweetest Day
White Cane Safety Day (36)
October–November	
Diwali (religious)
November
Native American Indian Heritage Month	
Veterans Day (federal)
Thanksgiving (federal)
Day after Thanksgiving (24)
Election Day (CA, DE, HI, KY, MT, NJ, NY, OH, PR, WV, proposed federal)
Family Day (NV)
Hanukkah (religious)
Lā Kūʻokoʻa (HI, unofficial)
Native American Heritage Day (MD, WA)
Obama Day (Perry County, AL)
December	
Christmas (religious, federal)
Alabama Day (AL)
Christmas Eve (KY, NC, SC)
Day after Christmas (KY, NC, SC, TX)
Festivus
Hanukkah (religious, week)
Indiana Day (IN)
Kwanzaa (religious, week)
National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day (36)
New Year's Eve
Pan American Aviation Day (36)
Rosa Parks Day (OH, OR)
Wright Brothers Day (36)
Varies (year round)	
Eid al-Adha (religious)
Eid al-Fitr (religious)
Ramadan (religious, month)
Legend:
(federal) = federal holidays, (state) = state holidays, (religious) = religious holidays, (week) = weeklong holidays, (month) = monthlong holidays, (36) = Title 36 Observances and Ceremonies
Bold indicates major holidays commonly celebrated in the United States, which often represent the major celebrations of the month.

See also: Lists of holidays, Hallmark holidays, public holidays in the United States, New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands.
v
t
e
Official holidays of the New York Stock Exchange
Whole days	
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
Washington's Birthday
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Partial days	
Day before Independence Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve