The American Revolutionary War was a conflict that pitted the original Thirteen British Colonies in North America against the Kingdom of Great Britain. It occurred between 1775 and 1783, ending with the British defeat at the Battle of Yorktown and the signing of the Treaty of Paris. During the war, France aided the American revolutionaries with ground troops commanded by Rochambeau and the Marquis de La Fayette and by fleets under the command of sailors such as Guichen, de Grasse, and d'Estaing. Spain, for its part, did so initially thanks to Bernardo de Glvez and openly after the battle of Saratoga, through the arms and supplies provided by the ships of the merchant Diego María de Gardoqui and by opening a front on the southern flank . The British colonies that became independent from Great Britain built the first liberal and democratic political system, giving birth to a new nation, the United States of America, incorporating the new revolutionary ideas that advocated equality and freedom. This colonial society was formed from waves of immigrant settlers and did not have in it the characteristic features of the rigid European estate system. In the southern colonies (Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia) a slave system had been organized (with some 500,000 black slaves) who exploited tobacco, cotton and sugar plantations. In this way, the population was made up of large and small owners and slaves. The background to the War of Independence of the United States dates back to the Franco-British confrontation in North America and the consequences of the Seven Years' War. The Seven Years' War ended in 1763. On February 10, the Treaty of Paris ended the French colonial empire in North America and established England as the hegemonic power. In opposition he only had Spain, which controlled New Orleans, the most important city, with about 10,000 inhabitants. Regarding France, the territorial loss was not felt as something catastrophic. Fishing rights in Newfoundland were preserved and the Francophone Catholic population would be treated with respect. On the other hand, in the Caribbean the losses could be compensated, since the main French colony in the Caribbean, Saint-Domingue (the Spanish) with its capital in Port-au-Prince, produced half of the sugar consumed in the whole world, and its trade with Africa and the Antilles was in full swing. Regarding the American colonists, the war radically modified the previous panorama. The Catholic Francophones of Quebec, traditional enemies of the American settlers in the Thirteen Colonies, were treated with respect by the British authorities. Agreement that was confirmed in 1774 when Canada was given a particular status within the American colonies, taking its borders to the confluence of the Ohio and the Mississippi. Likewise, its population retains its own civil rights and the Catholic Church is recognized. All these movements were poorly accepted by the population of the Thirteen Colonies. The immediate cause of this conflict was the unfair treatment that Great Britain inflicted on the settlers, since they brought wealth and taxes to the metropolis but did not have the means to decide on said taxes, so they felt marginalized and unrepresented. Table of Contents 1 The American Revolutionary War 1.1 The First Fighting 1.2 The Battle of Saratoga 1.3 Foreign Aid and the End of the War 2 The 1783 Treaty of Paris (the Peace of Versailles) 3 The New Constitution 4 See Also 5 References 5.1 Notes 5.2 Bibliography 6 External links The War of Independence of the United States [ edit ] Great Britain was victorious over France in the Seven Years' War (1756-1763) receiving great economic and military aid from the colonies, although said collaboration was not rewarded. The repressive measures of the English government (produced after uprisings such as the Boston Tea Party and the sanctions of the Intolerable Acts) provoked the beginning of the war of independence. Discontent spread throughout the Thirteen Colonies and a demonstration was organized in Boston against the taxes they had to pay for essential items such as paper, glass or paint. In this demonstration there was no altercation and the English government turned a deaf ear to the demands of the settlers. But they were not going to allow the situation to continue like this, so they met together with several members of other towns to concoct an action more propagandistic than the demonstration. In 1773 the colonists gathered in Boston. Three ships arrived from Great Britain loaded with boxes containing tea. Several members of the secret society disguised themselves as Indians and swam until they reached the three boats. Once there, they captured their crew members and threw the merchandise overboard. It was the first action against the repression of taxes, which unsettled the British. In 1774, the first Congress of colonists met against serfdom to the British and in favor of an independent homeland, the First Continental Congress. Some hypothetical laws are already discussed. Despite the climate of enmity against the English in the colonies, there were still some colonists who supported the English king George III, being called kings friends. The first fights [ edit ] On April 19 , 1775 , English soldiers left Boston to prevent the rebellion of the colonists by seizing an arms depot of the latter in the neighboring city of Concord . In the town of Lexington they faced 70 militiamen. Someone, no one knows who, opened fire, and thus began the war of independence. The English took Lexington and Concord, but on their way back toward Boston they were harassed by hundreds of volunteers from Massachusetts. The first casualties of the conflict occur, eight settler soldiers. By June, 10,000 colonial soldiers were besieging Boston. In May 1775, a Second Continental Congress met in Philadelphia and began to assume the functions of the national government. He appointed fourteen generals, authorized the invasion of Canada, and organized a field army under the command of George Washington, a Virginia planter and veteran of the French and Indian War. Aware that the southern colonies were wary of Massachusetts fanaticism, John Adams pressed for the selection of this forty-three-year-old Virginian militia colonel as commander-in-chief. It was an inspired choice. Washington, attending Congress in uniform, looked the part; he was tall and serene, with a dignified military air that inspired confidence. As one congressman put it: He wasn't a crazy, ranting, swearing guy, but someone who was sober, steady, and calm. Soldiers began to be recruited from all over the colonies. Many of them were farmers or hunters, bullies and little trained in combat. In the first fights against the British, George Washington even said: we have recruited an army of generals, they obey no one. At first, the war was unfavorable for the colonists. In June 1775 both armies met at Bunker Hill, across from Boston. The rebels had dug in on the hill, and although the British stormed the mainland positions with violence, the settlers managed to hold off the attack for quite some time; by the time the last raiders make it to the top British casualties are 800. It is a Pyrrhic victory for the British. The insurgents also circulated their version of events, which was none other than that they had withdrawn simply due to lack of ammunition and not because of the pressure of the red coats. After leaving Bunker Hill, the settlers focused on fortifying the other hill, Dorchester Heights, which they achieved thanks to the cannons they captured at Fort Ticonderoga, brought in a complex operation from there by the young Colonel Henry Knox ( this transport operation is known as "noble artillery train"). British General William Howe, seeing this fortification, decided to surrender and evacuate the city of Boston on March 17, 1776 (evacuation day). On July 2, 1776, Congress finally resolved that: These United Colonies are, and by right ought to be, free and sovereign states. On July 4, 1776, 56 US Congressmen met to pass the United States Declaration of Independence, which Thomas Jefferson drafted with the help of fellow Virginians. Paper money was printed and diplomatic relations with foreign powers began. In congress were four of the leading figures of independence: George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, and John Adams. Of the 56 congressmen, 14 died during the war. Benjamin Franklin becomes the first ambassador and head of the secret services. The unit then spread out across the Thirteen Colonies to fight the British. The declaration presented a public defense of the War of Independence, including a long list of complaints against the English sovereign George III. But above all, he explained the philosophy that supported independence, proclaiming that all men are born equal and have certain inalienable rights, including life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness; that governments can govern only with the consent of the governed; that any government can be dissolved when it fails to protect the rights of the people. This political theory originated with the English philosopher John Locke, and occupies a prominent place in the Anglo-Saxon political tradition. These events convinced the British government that they were not simply facing a local New England revolt. It was soon assumed that the United Kingdom was involved in a war, and not in a simple rebellion, so conventional eighteenth-century military policy decisions were made, consisting of maneuvers and battles between organized armies. German troops who served with the British, called Hessians or Hessians in English (C. Ziegler, after Conrad Gessner, 1799). This change in strategy forced the British to evacuate Boston in March 1776 and transfer their main forces to New York, whose population was presumed more favorable to the Crown, with a larger port and a central position. Consequently, in the summer of 1776, Sir William Howe, who succeeded Gage as Commander-in-Chief of the British Army in North America, arrived in New York Harbor with a force of over thirty thousand men. Howe intended to cut off New England from the other rebels and defeat Washington's army in a decisive battle. He was going to spend the next two years trying to carry out this plan. From all appearances, a military confrontation seemed very advantageous for Great Britain, one of the most powerful world powers, with a population of some eleven million, against two and a half million colonists, a fifth of whom were black slaves. The British navy was the largest in the world and almost half of its ships were initially involved in the conflict with the nascent United States. The army was a well-trained professional force; by 1778, it had nearly fifty thousand soldiers stationed in North America alone, to which were added more than thirty thousand German mercenaries during the war. To confront such military might, the rebels had to start from scratch. The Continental Army numbered less than 5,000 permanent troops, supplemented by state militia units of varying sizes. In most cases they were commanded by inexperienced and unprofessional officers. George Washington, the commander in chief, for example, had only been a regimental colonel on the Virginia frontier and had little combat experience. He knew nothing of moving large masses of soldiers and had never led a siege on a fortified position. Many of its officers had come from the middle classes of society: there were innkeepers turned captains and cobblers turned colonels, as one French officer exclaimed in astonishment. Moreover, it often happens that colonists ask French officers what trade they have in France. Little wonder, then, that most British officers thought the insurgent army was nothing more than a despicable band of vagabonds, deserters and thieves unable to rival Her Majesty's redcoats. One British general once boasted that with a thousand grenadiers he could go from one end of North America to the other and castrate all the men, partly by force and partly with a little persuasion. Crossing the Delaware River. However, these contrasts were misleading, because the British disadvantages were immense from the beginning of the conflict. Great Britain had to conduct the war from across the Atlantic, three thousand miles away, with consequent communications and logistics problems; even feeding properly was an almost insurmountable problem. At the same time, he had to wage a war quite unlike any country in the eighteenth century. America itself was unconquerable. The enormous extension of the territory made conventional maneuvers and operations difficult and cumbersome. The local and fragmented nature of authority in North America inhibited any decisive action on the part of the British. There was no nerve center whose capture could succeed in crushing the rebellion. The British generals eventually decided that their main objective should be to engage Washington's army in battle, but, as the British commander-in-chief said, they did not know how to do it, since the enemy moves much faster than we can. We are able . One of the main problems for the settlers was the poor quality of their muskets, which were already outdated and could only fire a few meters for accuracy. This led to the creation of a new type of more effective weapon, which was the Pennsylvania model rifle, highly accurate from more than 80 meters. The settlers in these early battles fought in the form of guerrillas. George Washington, for his part, understood from the beginning that, on the American side, the war had to be defensive. On all occasions we must avoid general action, he said before Congress in September 1776, or risk nothing, unless compelled by necessity into which we should not be drawn. Although he never acted as a guerrilla leader and concentrated all the time on creating a professional army, with which he intended to beat the British in open battle, in reality, his troops spent much of their time skirmishing with the enemy, harassing him and depriving him of power. of food and supplies whenever possible (guerrilla warfare). In these circumstances, the Americans' reliance on unprofessional militia forces and the weakness of their organized military made them, as one Swiss officer put it, "more dangerous than if they had a regular army." The British never understood what they were up against; that is, to a true revolution that had the general support of the population. Therefore, they continually underestimated the resistance of the rebels and overestimated the strength of the colonists loyal to the Crown. In the end, independence came to mean more to the Americans than the reconquest or retention of the Thirteen Colonies did to the British. The Battle of Saratoga[edit] Main articles: Saratoga Campaign and Battle of Saratoga. Things began to change in October 1777, when a British army under General John Burgoyne surrendered at Saratoga in upstate New York. This was the coup de grace and propaganda that the colonists needed for their independence. Indians (led by Joseph Brant) arrived from Canada on behalf of the British because the settlers were taking more and more of their land. The expedition was commanded by General John Burgoyne and intended to reach Albany. However, they were intercepted and had to give battle at Freeman, near the Hudson River. Here were the colonists led by Benedict Arnold, Horatio Gates, and Daniel Morgan. The latter commanded fur-clad riflemen, many of them former hunters. General Burgoyne had 600 German mercenaries (the British used as many as 16,000 throughout the war) to take the farm. On September 9, Morgan has his men well hidden in a forest adjoining the farm and in its wheat fields. Once the German mercenaries approach, the riflemen come out of their hiding places and shoot at the enemies, producing great surprise among them and causing dozens to fall. Burgoyne then sends another 600 more, which also fall. The British fall back, but Burgoyne holds out, albeit without supplies or food, and manages to take the farm shortly thereafter. Horatio Gates, although a pessimistic man, is convinced by Morgan and Arnold to launch an attack on the British. With the cannons seized from the British, they bombard the farm and obtain Burgoyne's surrender. Amidst the cannonade of the settlers, a British general, Simon Fraser, ordered a cavalry charge totally desperate due to the difficult situation. This charge was quickly neutralized by Morgan's men, who managed to finish off the general. This, before dying, asked to be buried on the battlefield, and for this several British soldiers met, which came to confuse the colonists. Believing that the enemies were reorganizing for another attack, they began to barrage the area in which they were burying Simon Fraser, and although they did not hit their target, they did cause those struggling to do so to be splattered with sand and dust. . In the end he was able to be buried in a hail of cannonballs. This fact produced this phrase from a German general named Riedesel: what a great burial for a great warrior! Foreign aid and the end of the war Buoyed by the victory at Saratoga, France and Spain saw the opportunity as a golden opportunity to gain revenge for the disastrous Treaty of Paris of 1763, which ended the War of the United States. Seven Years. Thus, France, after a few months of some hesitation, openly entered the war, signing an alliance in February 1778 with the colonists. Despite their meager supplies and limited training, the colonial troops generally fought well, but they might have lost the war if they had not received help from the French treasury, the powerful French navy, and troops sent by France. For its part, Spain, although it immediately helped the rebels with money, weapons and ammunition, was reluctant to intervene directly, due to Floridablanca's fear of the consequences of an armed conflict; He even aspired to something that, for the moment, was a true utopia: mediation between the contenders. [ 24 ] The Spanish objectives in America were to expel the British both from the Gulf of Mexico and from the shores of the Mississippi and to achieve the disappearance of their settlements in Central America . [25] Spanish aid, in any case, was limited, and more interested in obtaining the established territorial goals than in favoring the independence of the Thirteen Colonies. [26] After 1778, the fighting moved south and the conflict had already taken on an international character with the entry of France. A year later, reality set in and Spain declared war on England, even considering the possibility of invading Great Britain through the assistance of a Franco-Spanish army, a plan that proved unfeasible. For its open entry into the conflict, the Spanish government had signed the so-called Treaty of Aranjuez, a secret agreement with France sealed in Aranjuez on April 12, 1779, by which Spain obtained a series of concessions in exchange for joining France in the war. war. [27] She promised her help in the recovery of Menorca, La Mobila, Panzacola, the Bay of Honduras and the coast of Campeche and assured that she would not conclude any peace that did not involve the return of Gibraltar to Spain. [28] This caused the British to divert troops originally intended for the colonies to Gibraltar. The ports of Toulon and Brest in France, which were blockaded by the British, were unblocked due to the lack of British troops. With the Atlantic ports open, the French were able to bring troops to America under the command of La Fayette and Rochambeau, this aid being of great importance to the colonists, as noted above. Later Holland also joined the coalition formed by Spain and France, with ambitions to gain positions by dominating the seas, although unlike her allies, she did not contribute troops, only supplies, weapons, clothing, currency and some. Warships. In 1781, 8,000 British soldiers under General Charles Cornwallis were surrounded in Virginia, the last redoubt, by a French fleet and a combined French-American army under George Washington of 16,000 men. Following the siege of Yorktown, Cornwallis surrendered, and the British government proposed peace. In the battle 156 British, 52 French and 20 independence fighters fell, the last being killed in combat during the War of Independence. In the remaining fronts between 1779 and 1781, Spain besieged Gibraltar, once again unsuccessfully, and launched several campaigns against different strategic points of the Gulf of Mexico in British hands, most of them crowned with success (Pensacola). On the other hand, a successful expedition to Menorca allowed the recovery of the island in February 1782. The Treaty of Paris or Treaty of Versailles was signed on September 3, 1783 between Great Britain and the United States and put an end to the War of Independence from United States. The fact that Great Britain lost all possessions on the American continent south of Canada and north of Florida made a favorable military outcome impossible for the British, who requested the cessation of hostilities. The 1783 Treaty of Paris (the Peace of Versailles)[edit] Main article: Treaty of Versailles (1783) Recognized the independence of the United States of America and granted the new nation all territory north of Florida, south of Canada and east of the Mississippi River. The 32nd parallel was established as the northern border. Great Britain also gave up the Ohio Valley and gave the United States full power over the Newfoundland fishery. Spain held the recovered territories of Minorca and eastern and western Florida. On the other hand, it recovered the coasts of Nicaragua, Honduras (Costa de los Mosquitos) and Campeche. Spanish sovereignty over the colony of Providencia and English sovereignty over the Bahamas were recognized. However, Great Britain retained the strategic position of Gibraltar (London was adamant, since control of the Mediterranean was impracticable without the fortress of the Rock). France recovered most of its islands in the Antilles, in addition to the squares of the Senegal River in Africa. The Netherlands received Sumatra, being obliged to deliver Negapatam (in India) to Great Britain and to recognize the English the right to navigate freely in the Indian Ocean. Great Britain kept Canada under its Empire, despite the fact that the Americans tried to export their revolution to Canadian lands. Finally, the prisoner exchange was agreed upon. In general, the achievements reached can be judged as favorable for Spain and to a lesser extent for France, despite the high cost of war and the losses caused by the almost paralysis of trade with America, a heavy burden that would weigh on the subsequent French economic situation. On the other hand, the triumph of the American rebels over England was not going to stop influencing the Spanish colonies in the near future. This influence came through different paths: the emulation of what was done by communities in similar circumstances, the solidarity of the former colonists with those who were still colonists, the help of other powers interested in the disappearance of the Spanish colonial empire, etc. These aspects were manifested in a clear way during the Napoleonic Wars. The new constitution [ edit ]