American Revolutionary War
The American Revolutionary War (1775–1783), the American War of Independence , or simply the War of Independence in the United States, was an uprising by thirteen of the North American colonies of Great Britain who declared themselves independent in 1776 as the United States of America . France contracted an alliance with the new country in 1778, which escalated the conflict into a world war between Britain and France , Spain and the Netherlands . Simultaneously fighting broke out in India between the British East India Company and the French alliedkingdom of Mysore .

The war originated in the resistance of many Americans to taxes imposed by the British Parliament, which they demanded were unconstitutional . Patriot advocates escalated into boycotts and the destruction of tea shipments at the Boston Tea Party . The British government punished Massachusetts by closing the port of Boston and changing its charter. Patriots in Massachusetts responded by creating a shadow government that took control of the area outside of Boston. Twelve other colonies supported Massachusetts, created the Continental Congressto coordinate their resistance and set up committees and conventions that effectively seized power from the royal governments. In April 1775, fighting broke out between Massachusetts militia units and British regulars at Lexington and Concord . The Continental Congress appointed General George Washington to take charge of the militia units, laying siege to the British forces in Boston, who were forced to evacuate in March 1776.

In July 1776 the Continental Congress formally declared independence . The British, meanwhile, were gathering forces to quell the uprising. Sir William Howe outmaneuvered and defeated Washington, capturing New York and New Jersey, but Washington captured the Burlap branch at Trenton and drove the British out of most of New Jersey. In 1777 Howe's army launched a campaign against Philadelphia instead of aiding Burgoyne's separate invasion force from Canada . Unsupported by Howe, Burgoyne's outnumbered army was forced to surrender after the Battles of Saratoga in October 1777. This event caused France to enter the war in 1778followed by their ally Spain in 1779. The participation of France, Spain and the Netherlands was decisive when they contributed decisive power of land and sea to the war and forced the British to divert a large part of their resources away from North America.

After 1778, the British shifted their attention to the southern colonies, which brought them initial success when they regained Georgia and South Carolina for the Crown in 1779 and 1780. In 1781, British forces attempted to subjugate Virginia , but a French naval victory just outside the Chesapeake Bay resulted to the Franco-American siege of Yorktown and the capture of over 7,000 British soldiers. The defeat at Yorktown, as well as changes elsewhere, finally turned opinion in the British Parliament against the war. 1783 Treaty of Parisended the war and recognized the sovereignty of the United States over territory roughly bounded by what is now Canada to the north, Florida to the south, and the Mississippi River to the west.

Causes
taxes
The conclusion of the Seven Years' War in 1763 (the French and Indian War in North America) saw Britain triumphant in driving the French out of North America, but also heavily in debt. Taxes in Britain were already very high and it was believed that the American colonies would have to pay for soldiers to be stationed there. Parliament passed the Stamp Actin March 1765, which imposed direct taxes on the colonies for the first time, beginning November 1. This met with strong condemnation among American representatives, who argued that their "Rights as Englishmen" meant that taxes could not be levied on them because they lacked representation in Parliament. At the same time, the colonists rejected the decision of being granted representation, arguing that "their local circumstances" made it impossible.

Mob violence prevented the law from being enforced, and organized boycotts of British goods were instituted. This resistance was by and large unexpected, and "produced a strong and very natural irritation" among the British.

A change of government in Great Britain resulted in the repeal of the Stamp Act as inexpedient, but also the passing of the Declaratory Act , which stated, "the said colonies and plantations in America were, and the rights ought to be, subject to, and dependent on, the imperial crown and the Parliament of Great Britain" .

In their declarations, the Americans considered domestic taxes like the Stamp Act as illegal, but not foreign taxes as longstanding customs duties. Thus, in 1767 Parliament passed the Townshend Act , which imposed duties on various British goods exported to the colonies. Americans quickly denounced it as illegal as well, since the intention of the act was to raise revenue and not regulate trade. For their part, the British could not understand why Americans considered Parliamentary trade taxes legal but not income taxes.

In 1768 violence broke out in Boston and 4,000 British troops were sent to occupy the city. Parliament threatened to try Massachusetts for treason in England. Far from being intimidated, the colonists formed new associations to boycott British goods, albeit with less effectiveness than before since Townshend imports were so widely used. In March 1770, five colonists in Boston were killed in the " Boston Massacre ", sparking outrage.

In 1773, in order to save the East India Company from financial difficulties, the British attempted to increase its sales of tea by exempting the Company from the tea tax and appointing certain merchants in America to receive and sell tax-free tea. The landing of this tea was resisted throughout the colonies, and when the royal governor of Massachusetts refused to hand over ships of tea back to Boston, Patriot mobs destroyed the tea boxes.

A crisis
No one was punished for the Boston Tea Party , and in 1774 Parliament ordered Boston Harbor closed until payment was made for the destroyed tea. It then passed a Massachusetts government law to punish the rebellious colony. The upper house of the Massachusetts legislature would have been appointed by the Crown, as was already the case in other colonies such as New York and Virginia . The royal governor was able to appoint and remove at will all judges, sheriffs and other executive officers, and to limit city meetings. Jurors would be selected by the sheriffs and British soldiers would be tried outside the colony for alleged infractions. They were collectively called the " Intolerable Laws "» Patriots.

Although these actions were not unprecedented (the Massachusetts charter had already been replaced once in 1691), the people of the colony were outraged. City meetings led to the Suffolk Resolutions , a declaration not to cooperate with the royal authorities. In October 1774 an illegal " provincial congress " was established, which took control of Massachusetts outside of British-occupied Boston and began a training militia for the war effort.

Meanwhile, in September 1774 representatives of the other colonies convened the First Continental Congress to respond to the crisis. Congress rejected the " Union Plan "to set up an American Parliament that could approve or disapprove of the actions of the British Parliament. Instead, they reaffirmed the Suffolk Resolutions and demanded that the repeal of all Parliamentary acts be passed from 1763, not just the tea tax and the "Intolerable Laws". They declared that Parliament had no authority over the internal affairs of America, but that they would "cheerfully agree" to exchange regulations, including customs duties, in favor of the empire. They also demanded that Britain admit that it was "against the law" to unilaterally station troops in the colonies in peacetime. Although Congress lacked any remedy, it ordered the formation of Patriot committees that would enforce the boycott of British goods beginning December 1, 1774.

This time, however, the British would not concede. Edmund Burke introduced a motion to annul all Acts of Parliament objected to by the Americans and waive any UK rights to tax on income, but this was defeated 210-105. Parliament voted to restrict all colonial trade to Britain, prevent them from using the Newfoundland fisheries , and increase the size of the army and navy by 6,000. In February 1775 , Prime Minister Lord Northproposed not to impose taxes if the colonies themselves made "fixed contributions". This would safeguard the tax rights of the colonies from future infringement, allowing them to contribute to the service of the empire. This proposal was nonetheless rejected by Congress in July as the "insidious maneuver" by which the hostilities of the time broke out.

Domestic British politics
During this time, the British did not form a united front with the American Patriots. The UK Parliament at this time was unofficially divided between the Conservative (Tory) and Liberal (Liberal) factions. The Liberals generally favored the benign regime of the colonists with the exception of independence, while the Tories staunchly supported the rights of Parliament. Liberals felt that Tory political principles were causing Americans to rebel, while Tories thought that Liberal leniency (such as the repeal of the Stamp Act) was doing the same. Many Liberals loosely associated themselves with the American Patriot cause, which the Tories thought encouraged the Americans in their resistance. The result was that although Lord North's governmentThe Tories usually had a Parliamentary majority, a large Liberal minority opposed him and constantly criticized his policies. Meanwhile, Liberal commanders in America such as Sir William Howe and his brother Admiral Howe would come under suspicion to the Tories and Loyalists for not vigorously prosecuting the war economy.

First phase, 1775–1778
Sudden outbreak of war 1775–76
Massachusetts
In February 1775 Parliament declared that Massachusetts was in a state of rebellion. Lieutenant General Thomas Gage , the British North American commander in chief , commanded four regiments of British regulars (about 4,000 men) from his main office in Boston, but the countryside was in the hands of the Revolutionaries. On April 14, he received orders to disarm the rebels and arrest their leaders.

On the night of April 18, 1775, General Gage sent 700 men to seize ammunition stored by the colonial militia at Concord, Massachusetts . Riders including Paul Revere alerted the countryside, and when the British troops entered Lexington on the morning of 19 April they found 77 Active men formed about the village green. Shots were exchanged, killing several Active people. The British moved on to Concord, where a branch of three companies was occupied and routed at the North Bridge by a force of 500 active men. As the British retreated back to Boston, thousands of militiamen attacked them along the roads, inflicting many casualties before timely British reinforcements averted total disaster. SoWith the battles of Lexington and Concord , the war began.

The militia converged on Boston, bottling up the British in the city. About 4,500 more British soldiers arrived by sea, and on June 17, 1775, British forces under General William Howe captured the Charlestown peninsula in the Battle of Bunker Hill . Instead of landing behind the Americans, a movement that would not only easily win the battle but also expose the rest of the rebel army to destruction, the British launched a costly frontal attack. The Americans retreated, but British losses amounted to over 1,000 men. The siege was not broken and Gage was soon replaced by Howe as British commander in chief. General Gage wrote to the Secretary at War in London:

People: These show the spirit and behavior against us, they never showed against the French….They are now energetic with anger and enthusiasm so great as ever that the people have been hung up on and you have to keep moving in earnest or give up the business. A small body operating in one spot won't help, you have to have multiple armies doing diversions on different sides to share their strength. The loss we have endured is more than we can bear. Smaller armies cannot afford such losses, especially when the advantage gained tends to do little more than receive mail.

In July 1775, the newly appointed General Washington arrived outside of Boston to take charge of the colonial forces and organize the Continental Army. Realizing his army's desperate shortage of gunpowder, Washington asked for new sources. The arsenals were raided and some production was undertaken; 90% of the supply (2 million pounds) was imported by the end of 1776, mainly from France. Patriots in New Hampshire captured powder, muskets and cannons from Fort William and Mary in Portsmouth Harbor in late 1774. Some ammunition was used in the Boston campaign.

The dead end continued throughout the fall and winter. During this time, Washington was astounded by Howe's failure to attack his cutting, poorly armed forces. In early March 1776, the heavy guns that the Patriots had captured at Fort Ticonderoga were brought to Boston by Colonel Henry Knox and placed on Dorchester Heights. Since the artillery had now missed British positions, Howe's situation was precarious and the British escaped on 17 March 1776 by sailing to their naval base at Halifax, Nova Scotia , an event now celebrated in Massachusetts as Evacuation Day . Washington then moved most of the Continental Army to reinforce New York.

Quebec
Three weeks after the siege of Boston began, a detachment of militia volunteers led by Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold captured Fort Ticonderoga , a strategically important point on Lake Champlain between New York and the province of Quebec . After that action, they also raided Fort St. John , near Montreal, which alarmed the population and authorities there. In response , the governor of Quebec, Guy Carleton, began to fortify St. John and opened negotiations with the Iroquoisand other Indian tribes to support them. These actions, combined with lobbying by both Allen and Arnold and the fear of a British attack from the north, eventually convinced Congress to allow an invasion of Quebec, with the aim of driving the British military out of that area. (Quebec was then often referred to as Canada , as much of its territory included the former French Province of Canada .)

Two Quebec-bound expeditions were undertaken. On September 28, 1775, Brigadier General Richard Montgomery marched north from Fort Ticonderoga with about 1,700 militia, besieging and capturing Fort St. Jean November 2 and then Montreal November 13. General Carlton fled to Quebec City and began preparing that city for an attack. The second expedition , led by Colonel Arnold, traversed the wilderness of what is now northern Maine. Logistics were difficult with 300 men returning and 200 more dying due to harsh conditions. By the time Arnold reached Quebec City in early November, he had only 600 of his original 1,100 men. The Montgomery force joined Arnold and theyattacked Quebec City on December 31, but were defeated by Carleton in a battle that ended with Montgomery dead, Arnold wounded, and over 400 Americans taken prisoner. The remaining Americans held out outside Quebec City until the spring of 1776, suffering from poor camp conditions and smallpox, and then withdrew when a squadron of British ships under Captain Charles Douglas arrived to relieve the siege.

Another attempt was made by the Americans to push back towards Quebec, but they failed at Trois-Rivieres on June 8, 1776. Carleton then launched his own invasion and defeated Arnold at the Battle of Volcourt Island in October. Arnold retreated to Fort Ticonderoga, where the invasion began. While the invasion ended as a disaster for the Americans, Arnold's efforts in 1776 delayed a full-scale British counteroffensive until the Lady's Baggage campaign of 1777.

The invasion cost the Americans their base of support in British public opinion, "So that strong action towards America is freely taken and approved by the majority of people of all ranks, professions or occupations, in this country." This gained them at best limited support in the Quebec populace, which, while somewhat supportive early in the invasion, became less so later in the occupation when US policy against suspected Loyalists became harsher and the army's hard currency ran out. Two small regiments of Canadians were recruited during the operation, and they were with the army on its retreat back to Tyconderoga. Even after their retreat Patriots continued to view Quebec as part of their cause, making specific rates for him to joinArticles of Confederation 1777.

Removal of royal officials
At the start of the war, the British only had a significant force in Boston, although this force would evacuate by signing a declaration . Patriots in all 13 colonies were quick to establish new revolutionary governments based around the various committees and conventions they created in 1774 and early 1775. The royal governors and officials found themselves powerless to stop the rebellion, and in many places were forced to flee. In many places the Patriots were energetic and supported by angry mobs, while the Loyalists were too intimidated or poorly organized to be effective without the British army. The term "lynching" originated when the Virginia Patriots held informal courts and arrested Loyalists (the term did not suggest an execution).

Loyalist letters throughout the conflict constantly claimed to be in the majority and influenced London officials to believe that it would be possible to form many Loyalist regiments. As early as 1780, the Loyalists were deceiving themselves and the top London officials about their supposedly strong base of support.

The Patriots crushed the Loyalists in the Snow Campaign in South Carolina in late 1775. Virginia Governor Lord Dunmore attempted to rally the Loyalist force, but was decisively beaten in December 1775 at the Battle of the Great Bridge . In February 1776, British General Clinton took 2,000 men and a naval division to help Loyalists mustering in North Carolina , only to call her back when he learned they had been crushed at the Battle of Moore's Creek Bridge . In June, he attempted to capture Charleston, South Carolina , a leading port in the South, but the assault, failed as a naval force, was repulsed by the Patriot forts.

Other than Thirteen , no other British North American colony joined the rebellion.

British reaction
King George III issued the Proclamation of Rebellion in August 1775 and addressed Parliament on October 26, 1775. He denounced the "authors and promoters of this desperate conspiracy" who "worked to inflame my people in America... and instill in their minds a system of opinions repugnant to to the true constitution of the Colonies, and to their dependent attitude towards Great Britain..." He detailed the measures taken to quell the rebellion, including " friendly offers of foreign aid ". The King's speech was confirmed by both Houses of Parliament, a motion in the House of Commons to oppose the coercive measures was defeated 278–108. The British received the Olive Branch Petition , written by the Second Continental Congressdated July 8, 1775, asking the King to reverse the policy of his ministers. Parliament debated whether or not to accept the petition, but after a long debate rejected it by 53 votes, seeing it as insincere. Parliament then voted to impose a blockade against the Thirteen Colonies. In 1777 the popularity of the war in Great Britain reached its peak. The king himself assumed full control as he micromanaged the war economy, despite the opposition of senior officials including Prime Minister North and the civilian commanders of the military and navy. The king vehemenly rejected independence and demanded the use of the Indians to harass the Americans.

Separately, the Irish Parliament pledged its allegiance and agreed to the withdrawal of troops from Ireland to put down the rebellion in America. The majority of Irish Protestants were against the war and favored the Americans, but the Catholic establishment supported the king. The American Revolution was the first war during which Irish Catholics were allowed to enter the military.

Militarily, the response to the rebellion was weak, greatly encouraging the American independence movement. The British peacetime army has been deliberately kept small since the Glorious Revolution to prevent abuse of power by the King. To muster the force, the British had to launch recruiting campaigns in Britain and Ireland and hire mercenaries from the German states, both very time-consuming. In the end, however, the British were able to send Sir William Howe 's army of 32,000 officers and men to open the campaign in late 1776. This was the largest force the British had ever sent outside of Europe at the time.

Campaign 1776–77
New York
Having withdrawn his army from Boston, General Howe now focused on the conquest of New York, which was then limited to the southern tip of Manhattan Island. Howe's force arrived off Staten Island on June 30, 1776, and his army captured it without resistance. To defend the city, General Washington spread his forces along the shores of New York Harbor, concentrated on Long Island and Manhattan . While the British and Burlap's newly hired troops were mustering , Washington had the newly issued Declaration of American Independence read to its men and citizens of the city.

Washington's position was extremely precarious because he divided his forces between Manhattan Island and Long Island, putting both in order to win at length. The British landed 22,000 men on Long Island at the end of August and horribly defeated the rebel army in the largest battle of the war, taking 1,000 prisoners and taking them to Brooklyn Heights . Howe then laid siege to the heights, claiming that he wanted to save his men's lives from direct attack, although by his own admission such an attack would succeed. He had to actively restrain his underlings from landing the finishing blow. Washington initially fortified his exposed position, but then personally directed the withdrawal of his entire remaining army and all their supplies across the East River.on the night of August 29-30 without a significant loss of men and materiel. Howe did not conduct adequate reconnaissance to detect the retreat.

A peace conference took place on 11 September to explore the possibility of a negotiated solution. The British advanced Lord North's "fixed contribution" formula of the previous year and indicated that other laws could be revised or repealed as long as Britain's authority was recognized. But the Patriot side still insisted that complete independence was required.

Howe then resumed the attack. On September 15, Howe landed approximately 12,000 men on Lower Manhattan, rapidly taking control of New York. The Americans took the island north to Harlem Heights, where they skirmished the next day but stood their ground. On September 21, a devastating fire broke out in the city, for which the rioters were widely blamed, although no definitive proof exists. On October 12, the British made an attempt to encircle the Americans, who failed due to Howe's decision to land on an island that was easily cut off from the mainland. The Americans evacuated Manhattan, and fought the Battle of White Plains on October 28against the British pursuit. During the battle, Howe refused to attack Washington's very vulnerable main force, instead attacking a hill that had no strategic value.

Washington retreated and Howe returned to Manhattan and captured Fort Washington in mid-November, taking about 3,000 prisoners. Thus began the infamous "prison trial" system the British maintained in New York for the rest of the war, during which more American soldiers and sailors died of neglect and disease than died in every battle of the entire war combined.

Howe then detached General Clinton with 6,000 men to capture Newport, Rhode Island for the British fleet, which was reached without encountering any major resistance. Clinton objected to this move, believing that the force would be better used by the Delaware River, where they could have caused irreparable damage to the retreating Americans.

New Jersey
General Lord Cornwallis continued to pursue Washington's army across New Jersey , but Howe ordered him to halt and Washington escaped across the Delaware River to Pennsylvania on 7 December. Howe refused to order a pursuit across the river, even though the prospect of the Continental Army was bleak. "These are the times that men's souls taste," wrote Thomas Paine , who was with the army on the retreat. The army has dwindled to less than 5,000 men fit for duty and will be reduced to 1,400 after enlistments expired at the end of the year. Congress moved inland and left Philadelphia in despair, although popular opposition to British occupation grew in the countryside.

Howe proceeded to divide his forces on New Jersey into small units that were vulnerable to defeat in depth with the weakest forces stationed closest to Washington's army. Washington decided to take the offensive, sneaking across the Delaware on the night of December 25-26, and capturing nearly 1,000 surprised and unfortified Burlaps at the Battle of Trenton . Cornwallis marched to retake Trenton, but was first repulsed and then outmaneuvered by Washington, who successfully attacked the British rearguard at Princeton on January 3, 1777, taking about 200 prisoners. Howe then conceded most of New Jersey to Washington, despite Howe's massive numerical superiority over him. Washington entered the quarters of winter inMorristown, New Jersey , giving morale to the American cause. Throughout the New Jersey winter militia continued to pursue the British and Burlap calls near their three remaining posts along the Raritan River . In April 1777, Washington was amazed that Howe had made no effort to attack his weak army.

Campaigns 1777–78
When the British began planning operations for 1777, they had two main armies in North America: the army in Quebec (later commanded by John Burgoyne ) and Howe's army in New York. In London , Lord Georges Germainapproved the campaign for these armies to converge on Albany, New York and split the American colonies in two, but gave no special orders to Howe, who developed his own plans. In November 1776 Howe requested large reinforcements so he could launch a series of offensives against Philadelphia, New England and Albany. This reinforcement was not provided so Howe changed his plan to launch an attack against Philadelphia only. Germain gave his approval to this, believing that Philadelphia could be taken in time for Howe to cooperate with the northern army. Howe, on the other hand, decided to send his army to Philadelphia by sea via the Chesapeake Bay instead of taking shorter routes or overland via New Jersey or the Delaware Bay. This left him completely incapable of helping Burgoyne.

Upstate New York
The first of the 1777 campaigns was an expedition from Quebec led by General John Burgoyne . The goal was to capture the Champlain Lake and Hudson River corridor , effectively isolating New England from the rest of the American colonies. Burgoyne's invasion had two components: he would defeat about 8,000 men along Lake Champlain towards Albany, New York , while a second column of about 2,000 men, led by Barry St Leger , would bring down the Mohawk Valley and a connection to Burgoyne at Albany.

Burgoyne depart in June, and returned Fort Ticonderoga in early July. After that, his march was slowed down by the Americans, who literally knocked down trees in his path, and by an extensive duffel convoy of his army. A squad sent out to seize supplies was decisively defeated at the Battle of Bennington by the American militia in August, depriving Burgoyne of nearly 1,000 men.

Meanwhile, St. Leger—more than half of his Native American force led by Sayenqueraghta — besieged Fort Stanwix . The American militia and their Indian allies marched in to relieve the siege, but were ambushed and dispersed at the Battle of Oriskany . As a second relief expedition approached, this time led by Benedict Arnold, St. Leger's Indian support abandoned him, forcing him to break off the siege and return to Quebec.

Burgoyne's army had been reduced to about 6,000 men by the loss at Bennington and the need to station Tyconderoga troops, and he was short on supplies. Despite these setbacks, he decided to rush to Albany. An American army of 8,000 men, officially commanded by General Horatio Gates (but effectively led by his subordinate Benedict Arnold ), fortified about 10 miles (16 km) south of Saratoga, New York . Burgoyne attempted to outflank the Americans, but was tested in the first battle of the Saratogain September. Burgoyne's situation was desperate, but he now hoped that help from Howe's army in New York might be on the way. It wasn't: Howe instead sailed away on his expedition to capture Philadelphia. American militias flocked to Gates' army, inflating his force to 11,000 by early October. After being horribly beaten in the second battle of the Lady's Suitcase , Burgoyne surrendered on 17 October.

British General Clinton in New York attempted a diversion in favor of Burgoyne in early October, capturing two key forts but withdrawing after hearing surrender.

The large lady's suitcase was the turning point of the war. Revolutionary confidence and determination, suffering from Howe's successful occupation of Philadelphia, was renewed. More importantly, the victory encouraged France to make an open alliance with the Americans after two years of semi-secret support. For the British, the war had now become much more difficult.

The Americans considered the British prisoners taken in the Lady's Suitcase until the end of the war in direct violation of the agreed terms of surrender, which determined that they would be immediately repatriated.

Pennsylvania
Howe began his campaign in June, making a series of maneuvers in New Jersey that did not significantly affect Washington's inferior strength. He then loaded his troops onto vehicles and sailed slowly towards the northern end of the Chesapeake Bay , landing 15,000 troops on August 25 at the head of the Elk River . Washington placed his 11,000 men in a strong position along the Brandywine River between the British and Philadelphia, but Howe outflanked and defeated him on September 11, 1777. French observers noted that Howe did not follow up on his victory, which may have destroyed Washington's army.

The Continental Congress again left Philadelphia, and on September 26, Howe finally outwitted Washington and marched into the unopposed city. Part of Howe's army was then split off to reduce the rebel forts blocking his Delaware River communications . Hoping to bring about another Trenton-like victory while the British were divided, on October 4, Washington launched a surprise attack against the British at Germantown. Howe did not alert his troops there, despite being aware of the impending attack the previous day. The British ran the risk of fleeing, but faulty American decisions resulted in Washington being repulsed with heavy losses.

The armies met at White Swamp in December where, after some skirmishing, Howe decided to retire, ignoring the vulnerability of Washington's rear, where an attack may have cut Washington off from his baggage and provisions. Washington and his army encamped at Valley Forge in December 1777, about 20 miles (32 km) from Philadelphia, where they remained for the next six months. Over the winter, 2,500 men (out of 10,000) died from disease and exposure, and the army was reduced to 4,000 effectives. During this time, Howe's army, comfortable in Philadelphia, made no effort to exploit the weakness of the American army. The next spring the army emerged from the Valley Forge in good condition, thanks in part to a training program supervisedBaron von Steuben , who introduced the most modern Prussian methods of organization and tactics.

Historians speculate that the British "lost several opportunities for military victory in 1776–1777..." and "if General Howe had broken military tradition by advancing in December on the Continental troops quartered [in the Valley Forge], then he could have crushed them with alacrity and possibly ended the war."

Howe submitted his resignation in October 1777; until it was acknowledged that he had spent his time in Philadelphia preparing his case for the pending parliamentary inquiry. Although he had twice as many men as Washington, the bitter memory of Bunker Hill made him very reluctant to attack entrenched American forces. General Clinton replaced Howe as British commander in chief on May 24, 1778.

foreign intervention
From 1776, France was unofficially involved in the American Revolutionary War, with French Admiral Latuch Treville securing supplies, ammunition, and weapons from France to the United States after Thomas Jefferson encouraged the French alliance. Weapons such as the de Vallière type were used, playing an important role in such battles as the Battle of the Saratoga . After learning about the American victory at the Saratoga, the French became concerned that the British would reconcile their differences with the colonists and turn on France. In particular King Louis XVIwas influenced by alarmist reports suggesting that Britain was preparing to make huge concessions to the colonies and then, allied with them, attack French and Spanish property in the West Indies. To thwart this, they concluded the Treaty of Union with the United States on February 6, 1778, committing the Americans to seek nothing less than absolute independence. Previously, France had only been prepared to act alongside their Spanish ally, but now they were prepared to go to war alone if necessary. Britain responded by remembering its ambassador, although Franco-British hostilities did not actually break out until 17 June 1778.

In 1776 , the Count of Aranda met in representation of Spain with the first American Commission, drawn up by Benjamin Franklin, Silas Dean and Arthur Lee. The Continental Congress ordered commissioners to travel to Europe and forge alliances with other European powers that could help break the British naval blockade along the North American coast. Aranda invited the commission to his home in Paris, where he acted as the Spanish ambassador, and he became a vocal supporter of the struggles of the fledgling Colonies, recommending early and overt Spanish allegiance to the Colonies. However, he was rejected by José Mognino, 1st Count of Floridablanca , who took a more cautious approach. The Spanish position was later summarized by the Spanish Ambassador to the French Court,Jeronimo Grimaldi , in a letter to Arthur Lee who was in Madrid trying to persuade the Spanish government to declare an open alliance. Grimaldi told Lee that "You have considered your own situation, and not ours. The moment has not yet come for us. The war with Portugal—France being unprepared, and our treasure ships from South America not arriving—makes it unsuitable for us to announce immediately." Meanwhile, Grimaldi assured that Lee, clothing and powder shops were being deposited in New Orleans and Havana for the Americans, and further supplies of blankets were being collected in Bilbao.

Spain finally entered the war officially in June 1779, thus implementing the Treaty of Aranjuez , although the Spanish government provided aid to the revolutionaries from the very beginning of the war. So also had the Dutch Republic , which was formally brought into the war at the end of 1780.

Second phase, 1778–1781
British politics
Following news of the handover in the Lady's Suitcase and concerns about French interference, the British decided to fully accept the original demands made by the American Patriots. Parliament repealed the remaining tax on tea and declared that no taxes would ever be imposed on the colonies without their consent (with the exception of customs duties, the revenues of which would be returned to the colonies). The Commission was set up to negotiate directly with the Continental Congressfor the first time. The commission was empowered to suspend all other undesirable activities by Parliament, passed from 1763, general amnesties of the issue, and to declare a cessation of hostilities. The commissioners arrived in America in June 1778 and offered to place the colonies on the condition of 1763 if they would return to the allegiance of the King. In addition, they agreed that no troops would be stationed in the colony without their consent. Congress refused to negotiate with the commission unless they first recognized American independence or withdrew all troops. On October 3, 1778, the British issued a proclamation offering amnesty to any colonies or people who accepted their offers within forty days, with grave consequences if they still refused. There was no positive response.

King George IIIgave up all hope of subjugating America with more armies while Britain had a European war to fight. "It was a joke," he said, "to think about storing Pennsylvania." There was no hope of a New England recovery. But the King was still determined to "never recognize the independence of the Americans and punish their defiance with an indefinite extension of a war that promised to be eternal." His plan was to keep the 30,000 men stationed in New York, Rhode Island, Quebec and Florida; other forces would attack the French and Spanish in the West Indies. To punish the Americans, the King planned to destroy their cabotage, bombard their ports; sack and burn towns along the coast and set the Native Americans free to attack civilians in frontier settlements. These operations, the King felt, would inspire the Loyalists; split Congress; and "keep the rebels persecuted, troubled, and poor, until the day when, by a natural and inevitable process, discontent and disillusionment have been transformed into remorse and repentance" and they will beg to return to his power. The plan meant destruction for the Loyalists and loyal Native Americans, an indefinite prolongation of a costly war and the risk of disaster as the French and Spanish assembled an armada to invade the British Isles. The king hoped to re-enslave the rebellious colonies after contact with the Americans' European allies. when, by a natural and inevitable process, discontent and disillusionment have been transformed into repentance and repentance," and they will ask to return to his power. The plan meant destruction for the Loyalists and loyal Native Americans, an indefinite prolongation of a costly war and the risk of disaster as the French and Spanish assembled an armada to invade the British Isles. The king hoped to re-enslave the rebellious colonies after contact with the Americans' European allies. when, by a natural and inevitable process, discontent and disillusionment have been transformed into repentance and repentance," and they will ask to return to his power. The plan meant destruction for the Loyalists and loyal Native Americans, an indefinite prolongation of a costly war and the risk of disaster as the French and Spanish assembled an armada to invade the British Isles. The king hoped to re-enslave the rebellious colonies after contact with the Americans' European allies.

Northern Theater after the Lady's Big Suitcase, 1778–81
The French entry into the war changed British strategy and Clinton abandoned Philadelphia to reinforce New York, now vulnerable to French naval power. Washington shadowed Clinton on his withdrawal across New Jersey and attacked him at Monmouth on June 28, 1778. The battle was tactically inconclusive, but Clinton successfully disengaged and continued his retreat to New York. This was the last major battle in the north. Clinton's army traveled to New York in July, arriving just before the French fleet under Admiral d'Estaing arrived from the American coast. Washington's army returned to White Plains, New York, north of New York. Although both armies were back where they had been two years earlier, the nature of the war had now changed as the British had to withdraw troops from North America to face French threats elsewhere.

In August 1778 the Americans attempted to capture British-held Newport, Rhode Island with French help, but the effort failed when the French withdrew their support. The war in the north then bogged down into a stalemate, with neither side capable of attacking the other in any decisive way. The British instead tried to obliterate the American decision by launching various raiding expeditions, such as the Fitting raid against Connecticut in July 1779. That year, the Americans scored two morale-boosting victories, capturing the posts at Stone Point and Paulus Hook., although the British quickly recaptured them. In October 1779, the British voluntarily left Newport and Stone Point to join forces.

During the winter of 1779–80, the American army suffered worse hardships than they had in the Valley Forge previously. Congress was ineffective, the Continental currency worthless, and the supply system was fundamentally broken. Washington found it extremely difficult to keep his army together, even without any major fighting against the British. In 1780 actual mutinies broke out in the American camp. The strength of the Continental Army had dwindled to the point that the British decided to launch two probing attacks against New Jersey in June 1780. The New Jersey militia rallied strongly, however, and the British quickly returned to their bases.

In July 1780, the American cause received a boost when 5,500 strong French expeditionary forces reached Newport, Rhode Island. Washington hoped to use this help to attack the British in New York and end the war. Events elsewhere, however, would shatter that. Additional French reinforcements were prevented from arriving by a British blockade of French ports, and the French troops at Newport quickly found themselves blockaded as well. In addition, the French fleet refused to visit the American coast in 1780, having suffered significant damage in operations in the West Indies.

Benedict Arnold , the American Grand Bag winner, grew increasingly frustrated with the fight and decided to defect. In September 1780 he attempted to surrender the key American fort at West Point along the Hudson River to the British, but his plot was exposed. He escaped and continued to fight under the British army. He wrote an open letter justifying his actions, arguing that he was only fighting for redress and since Britain had taken away those grievances (see above) there was no reason to continue to shed blood, especially in alliance with an ancient and tyrannical enemy like France . He led the last British attack in the north, a devastating raid against New London in September 1781.

In 1783 the British held Staten Island , Manhattan and Long Island before the world. These areas contained approximately 2% of the population of the Thirteen Colonies .

Northern and Western border
West of the Appalachians and along the border with Quebec , the American Revolutionary War was the " Indian War ". Most of the Native Americans supported the British. Like the Iroquois Confederacy, tribes such as the Shawnee faction and the Chickamauga split off from the rest of the Cherokee over differences regarding peace with the Americans . The British supplied their native allies with muskets, gunpowder and advice, while the Loyalists led raids against civilian settlements, especially in New York, Kentucky and Pennsylvania .. Combined Iroquoian-loyalist attacks in the Wyoming Valley in Pennsylvania and in Cherry Valley in New York in 1778 prompted Washington to send the Sullivan Expedition to western New York during the summer of 1779. There was little fighting as Sullivan systematically destroyed the Indians' winter food supplies, forcing them to continually flee to British bases in Quebec and the Niagara Falls area .

In the Ohio Country and the Illinois Country , Virginia frontiersman George Rogers Clark attempted to neutralize British influence among the Ohio tribes by capturing the outposts of Kaskaskia and Kaokia and Vincennes in the summer of 1778, in which he succeeded. When General Henry Hamilton , the British commander in Detroit , recaptured Vincennes, Clarke returned in a surprise march in February 1779 and captured Hamilton.

In March 1782, Pennsylvania militias killed about one hundred neutral Native Americans in the Gnadenhütten massacre . In the last major skirmishes of the war, a force of 200 Kentucky militia was defeated at the Battle of Blue Lick in August 1782.

Georgia and the Carolinas, 1778–81
During the first three years of the American Revolutionary War, the main military skirmishes were in the north, although some attempts to organize Loyalists were defeated, the British attempt at Charleston, South Carolina , failed, and many efforts to attack British forces in East Florida failed . After the French entry into the war, the British turned their attention to the southern colonies, where they hoped to regain control by recruiting large numbers of Loyalists. This southern strategy also had the advantage of keeping the Royal Navy closer to the Caribbean, where the British needed to protect economically important assets from the French and Spanish.

On December 29, 1778, an expeditionary force from Clinton's army in New York captured Savannah, Georgia . On October 9, 1779, an attempt by French and American forces to retake Savannah failed. Clinton then laid siege to Charleston, capturing it and most of the southern Continental Army on May 12, 1780. With relatively few casualties, Clinton captured the South's largest city and seaport, providing the basis for further conquest.

The remnants of the southern Continental Army began to withdraw to North Carolina , but were pursued by Lieutenant Colonel Banastre Tarleton , who defeated them at the Waxhaws on May 29, 1780. With these events, organized American military activity in the region collapsed, although the war was continued by adherents such as Francis Marion . Cornwallis took over British operations while Horatio Gates arrived to command the American effort. On August 16, 1780, Gates was defeated at the Battle of Camden in South Carolina, setting the stage for Cornwallis to invade North Carolina. Georgia and South Carolina are thus both back to the UK for the time being.

Cornwallis' efforts to advance into North Carolina were defeated. The loyalist wing of his army was utterly defeated at the Battle of Kings Mountain on October 7, 1780, which temporarily interrupted his planned advance. He received reinforcements, but his light infantry under Tarleton were decisively defeated by Daniel Morgan at the Battle of Cowpens on January 17, 1781. Despite this, Cornwallis decided to keep moving, betting that he would receive substantial Loyalist support. General Nathaniel Green , who replaced General Gates, evaded contact with Cornwallis while looking for reinforcements. By March, Greene's army had grown to the point where he felt he could face Cornwallis directly. In keyAt the battle of Guildford's Court , Cornwallis led Greene's much larger army away from the battlefield, but in doing so suffered losses amounting to one quarter of his army. Adding this up, far fewer Loyalists went into the army than expected because the Patriots put a lot of pressure on them and their families to become hostages. Cornwallis decided to retreat to coastal Wilmington, North Carolina for resupply and fortification, leaving the interior of the Carolinas and Georgia open to the Green. He then proceeded north to Virginia (see below).

American troops, along with Patriot adherents, then began the process of reclaiming territory in South Carolina and Georgia. Despite British victories at Hobkirk 's Hill and at the Siege of the Ninety-Six , by the middle of the year they were forced into the coastal lowland region of both colonies. The final battle ( the Battle of Eutho Springs ) in September 1781 was indecisive, but by the end of the year the British fought only Savannah and Charleston.

Virginia, 1781
Cornwallis continued to move from Wilmington north to Virginia , on the grounds that Virginia had to be subdued in order to hold the southern colonies. Earlier, in January 1781, a small British raiding force under Benedict Arnold landed there and began to move through the countryside, destroying supply bases, factories and other economic targets. In February, General Washington sent General Lafayette to confront Arnold, later also sending General Anthony Wayne . Arnold was reinforced with additional troops from New York in March, and his army was joined with that of Cornwallis in May. Lafayette skirmished with Cornwallis, avoiding a large scale battle while gathering reinforcements.

The Virginia Cornwallis campaign was strongly opposed by his superior, General Clinton, who did not believe such a large and disease-ridden area with a hostile population could be pacified with the limited forces available. Clinton instead approved operations to push further north into the Chesapeake region ( Maryland , Delaware , and southern Pennsylvania ), where he believed there was a strong Loyalist presence. Upon his arrival in Williamsburg in June, Cornwallis received orders from Clinton to establish a fortified naval base and a request to send several thousand troops to New York to counter a possible Franco-American attack. After these orders, he fortified Yorktown, and, shaded by Lafayette, awaited the arrival of the Royal Navy.

The northern, southern, and naval theaters of war converged in 1781 at Yorktown, Virginia . The French fleet became available for operations that could either move against Yorktown or New York. Washington still approved of attacking New York, but the French decided to send a fleet to their preferred target at Yorktown. Upon learning of the planned movement of the French fleet in August, Washington began to move his army south to cooperate. The British Navy, not realizing that the French had sent their entire fleet to America, sent an inadequate force under Admiral Graves.

In early September, French naval forces defeated the British fleet at the Battle of the Chesapeake , cutting off the rescue of Cornwallis. Cornwallis, still expecting to receive support, did not break out while he had the chance. When Washington's army arrived outside of Yorktown, Cornwallis prematurely abandoned his outward position, hastening his subsequent defeat. A combined Franco-American force of 18,900 men began to besiege Cornwallisat the beginning of October. For several days the French and Americans bombarded the British defenses, and then began to take the outer stronghold. The British attempted to fix the relief expedition but faced numerous delays. Cornwallis decided that his position was becoming precarious and he surrendered his entire army of over 7,000 men on October 19, 1781, the same day that the British fleet in New York had sailed for his relief.

Downfall of the northern ministry
News of the surrender at Yorktown arrived in Britain in November 1781. King George III took the news calmly and delivered a defiant address pledging to continue the war, a majority in the House of Commons confirmed it. In the months that followed, news came of other changes, however. The French and Spanish had successfully taken several of the West Indies and appeared to be on the verge of complete removal of the British there. Menorca also surrendered to a Franco-Spanish force on February 5, 1782, and Gibraltarseemed to be in danger of falling too. In light of this, Parliament on February 27, 1782 voted to cease all offensive operations in America and to strive for peace. Threatened by votes of no confidence, Lord North resigned on 20 March and his Tory government was replaced by the Liberals. Ironically, shortly after North retired, the British won the Battle of Saintes , ending the French threat in the West Indies, and they successfully liberated Gibraltar. Had North's government demanded a few more months, they would have been greatly reinforced and might have continued the war in spite of Yorktown.

The new Liberal administration accepted American independence as the basis for peace. There were no further major hostilities in North America, although the British still had 30,000 garrison troops occupying New York, Charleston, and Savannah. The war continued elsewhere, including the siege of Gibraltar and naval operations in the East and West Indies, until peace was agreed in 1783.

Naval conflict
When the war began, the British had overwhelming naval superiority over the American colonists. The Royal Navy had over 100 ships of the line and many frigates and smaller craft, although this fleet was old and in disrepair, a situation that would be blamed on Lord Sandwich , the Secretary of the Navy . During the first three years of the war, the Royal Navy was primarily used to transport troops for land operations and to protect commercial shipping. The American colonists had no ships of the line and relied extensively on privateering to pursue British shipping. Privateers have caused a disturbance disproportionate to their material success, although those operating from French portschannel before and after France joined, the war caused considerable embarrassment for the Royal Navy and inflamed Anglo-French relations. Approximately 55,000 American sailors served aboard privateers during the war. American privateers had nearly 1,700 ships and captured 2,283 enemy ships. The Continental Congress authorized the creation of a small Continental Navy in October 1775, which was primarily used for commercial raiding. John Paul Jones became the first great American naval hero by capturing HMS DrakeApril 24, 1778, the first victory for any American warship in British waters.

Great Britain vs. France, Spain, Mysore and Holland 1778–1783
Europe
Spain entered the war as a French ally with the aim of recovering Gibraltar and Menorca , which was captured by an Anglo-Dutch force in 1704. Gibraltar was besieged for over three years, but the British garrison stubbornly resisted and were re-supplied twice: once after Admiral Rodney 's victory over Juan de Langaroy in the 1780 "Battle of the Moon" , and again after Admiral Richard Howe fought Luis de Zvrdova y Zvrdova to a draw at the Battle of Cape Spartel. Further Franco-Spanish efforts to capture Gibraltar were unsuccessful. One notable success took place on February 5, 1782, when Spanish and French forces captured Menorca , which Spain retained after the war. Ambitious plans for an invasion of Britain in 1779 had to be abandoned .

West Indies and Gulf Coast
File:Combat naval 12 avril 1782-Dumoulin-IMG 5484. JPG|The Saintes battle was fought on 12 April 1782 near Guadeloupe.

File:Bernardo de Galvez.jpg|Bernardo de Galvez .

File:Jaillot-Elwe, Norteamerica, 1792.jpg|Norteamerica, 1792, Jaillot-Elwe, Florida borders after the war by Bernardo Galvez.

There was a lot of action in the West Indies, especially in the Lesser Antilles . Although France lost St. Lucia early in the war, its navy dominated the West Indies, capturing Dominica , Grenada , St. Vincent , Montserrat , Tobago , St. Kitts , and the Turks and Caicos between 1778 and 1782. Dutch possessions in The West Indies and South America were taken over by Great Britain but later returned by France and returned to the Dutch Republic . At the Battle of Saintes in April 1782, a victory by Rodney's fleet over the Frenchadmiral de Grasse dashed hopes of France and Spain to take Jamaica and other colonies from the British.

On the Gulf Coast , Count Bernardo de Gálvez , the Spanish governor of Louisiana, quickly removed the British from their outposts on the lower Mississippi River in 1779 in actions at Manchac and Baton Rouge in British West Florida . Galvez then captured Mobile in 1780 and stormed and captured the British stronghold and capital of Pensacola in 1781. On May 8, 1782, Galvez captured the British naval base at New Providence in the Bahamas; it was ceded to Spain after the Treaty of Paris and simultaneously restoredBritish Loyalists in 1783. Gálvez' actions resulted in the Spanish acquisition of East and West Florida in a peace settlement, denied the British the possibility of enveloping American forces from the south, and kept open a vital pipeline for supplies to the American frontier. The Continental Congress cited Gálvez in 1785 for his help during the revolution, and George Washington took him to his right during the first parade of July 4th .

Central America was also subject to conflict between Britain and Spain as Britain sought to expand its informal trading influence beyond coastal logging and fishing communities in present-day Belize , Honduras and Nicaragua . Expeditions against San Fernando de Omoa in 1779 and San Juan in 1780 (the latter famously led by the young Horatio Nelson ) met with only temporary success before being abandoned due to illness. The Spanish colonial leaders, in turn, could not completely eliminate British influences along the Mosquito Coast . With the exception of the French acquisitionTobago , sovereignty in the West Indies was returned to the bellum rates of the status quo in the world by 1783.

India
.

When word reached India in 1778 that France had entered the war, the British East India Company moved quickly to capture the French colonial outposts there, capturing Pondicherry after a two month siege. The capture of the French-controlled port of Mahe on the west coast of India motivated the ruler of Mysore , Hyder Ali (who was already frustrated at other British activities and benefited from trade to the port) to open the Second Anglo-Mysore War in 1780. Ali, and later his son Tipu The Sultan , almost drove the British out of south India, but were frustrated by weak French support, and the war ended the status quo bellum bet 1784 agreement regarding Mangalore . French opposition was led in 1782 and 1783 by Admiral Baillie de Suffren , who recaptured Trincomalee from the British and fought five celebrated, but largely inconclusive, naval undertakings against the British Admiral Sir Edward Hughes . France's Indian colonies were returned after the war.

File:SiegeOfCuddalore1783 .jpg|The armed confrontations in Cuddalore are part of the American Revolutionary War .

File:Bataille de Gondelour 20 juin 1783.jpg|Battle Cuddalore (1783) was a tactical and strategic French victory

Fourth Anglo-Dutch War
The Dutch Republic, nominally neutral, traded with the Americans, exchanging Dutch weapons and ammunition for American colonial equipment (in violation of the British Navigational Laws ), primarily through activities based at St. Eustatius , before the French formally entered the war. The British believed that this trade included smuggled military supplies and attempted to stop it, first diplomatically, by resorting to previous treaty obligations, an interpretation the terms of which the two countries disagreed on, and then by seeking out and capturing Dutch merchant ships. The situation escalated when the British seized a Dutch merchant convoy sailing under a Dutch naval escort.in December 1779, prompting the Dutch to join the League of Armed Neutrality . Britain responded to this decision by declaring war on the Dutch in December 1780, sparking the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War . The war was a military and economic disaster for the Dutch Republic. Paralyzed by internal political divisions, it could not effectively respond to British blockades of its coast and the capture of many of its colonies. In a 1784 peace treaty between the two countries, the Dutch lost the Indian port of Negapatam and were forced to make trade concessions. The Dutch Republic signed a friendship and trade agreement with the United States in 1782, becoming the second country (after France) to formally recognize the United States.

Agreement regarding Paris
In London, as political support for the war plummeted after Yorktown, British Prime Minister Lord North resigned in March 1782. In April 1782 the Commons voted to end the war in America. The preliminary peace articles were signed in Paris at the end of November 1782; the formal end of the war did not occur until the Treaty of Paris (for the US) and the Treaty of Versailles (for the other Allies) were signed on September 3, 1783. On November 25, 1783, the last British troops left New York and the US Congress of the Confederation ratified the Treaty of Paris on 14 January 1784 .

Britain negotiated the Treaty of Paris without consulting its Indian allies and ceded all Indian territory between the Appalachians and the Mississippi River to the United States. The Native Americans reluctantly confirmed these land cessions with the United States in a series of agreements, but fighting would be renewed in conflicts along the border in the coming years, the largest being the Northwest Indian War . The British sought to establish a buffer Indian state in the American Midwest and continued to pursue that goal as early as 1814 during the War of 1812 .

The United States got more than they expected with the Western Territory Award. The other Allies had mixed-to-poor results. France made some profits on her nemesis, Great Britain, but her material gains were minimal and her monetary losses huge. It was already in financial trouble, and her borrowing to pay for the war used up all her credit and created the financial disasters that marked the 1780s. Historians attribute those disasters to getting out of the French Revolution .. The Dutch clearly lost on all counts. The Spanish had a mixed record; they didn't achieve their primary military goal (rebuilding Gibraltar), but they did gain territory. However, in the long run, as the Florida case shows, the new territory was of minimal cost.

Analysis of the belligerents
The population of Great Britain and Ireland in 1780 was about 12.6 million, while the population of the thirteen colonies during the same year was estimated at 2.8 million including 500,000 slaves each. In theory this gave Britain a 4.5:1 manpower advantage, by comparison the Union manpower advantage over the Confederacy in the American Civil War .it was only 2.5:1. In practice, the British Army never had more than a slight numerical advantage over the Continental Army due to many factors, including the need to support significant numbers of troops outside of North America. Conscription did not exist in Britain at that time, and the proportion of Americans willing to serve in the defense of their own country was considered to be significantly larger than the proportion of British willing to serve overseas. One pre-war estimate claimed that the Patriots could mobilize 100,000 men within months, but a significant loyalist or neutralist sentiment would keep Patriot forces much smaller than their potential.

Historians continue to debate whether the odds for the American victory were long or short. John E. Furling says the odds were so long that the American victory was "Almost a Miracle". On the other hand, Joseph Ellissays the odds favored the Americans and asks if there was ever a realistic chance for the British to win? He claims that this opportunity came only once, in the summer of 1776, and the British failed that test. Admiral Howe and his brother, General Howe, "missed several opportunities to destroy the Continental Army... Chance, luck, and even the vagaries of the weather played an important role." Ellis' point is that Howes' strategic and tactical decisions were fatally flawed because they underestimated the challenges posed by the Patriots. Ellis concludes that once the Howe brothers failed, the opportunity for a British victory "would never come again". The official US Army textbook states that while the British difficulties were great, they were barely insurmountable.

Patriots
The Americans started the war with significant disadvantages compared to the British. They had no national government, no national army or navy, no financial system, no banks, no established credit, and no functioning departments such as the treasury. Congress attempted to handle administrative matters through legislative committees, which proved ineffective. The regional governments were themselves brand new and the officers had no administrative experience. In peacetime, the colonies relied heavily on ocean travel and shipping, but this was now closed by the British blockade and the Americans had to rely on slow overland travel.

However, the Americans had multiple advantages that ultimately outweighed the initial disadvantages they faced. The Americans had a large prosperous population that depended not on imports but on local production for food and most supplies, while the British were mostly shipped in from across the ocean. The British were faced with a vast territory, much larger than Britain or France, located at a distance from their home ports. Most Americans lived on farms far from seaports - the British could capture any port, but this did not give them control over the hinterland. They were on their home soil, had a smoothly functioning, well-organized system of local governments and regional governments, newspapers and printers and internal lines of communication. They had an entrenched system of local militias, previously used to fight the French and Native Americans, with companies and officer corps that could form a base of local militias and provide a training ground for the national army that Congress created.

Motivation was a major asset. The Patriots wanted to win; over 200,000 fought during the war; 25,000 died. The British expected the Loyalists to do most of the fighting; they did much less than expected. British hired outsider Germans to make the most of their fight.

At the start of the war, the Americans had no major international allies. Battles such as the Battle of Bennington , the Battles of Saratoga and even wins such as the Battle of Germantown proved decisive in gaining the attention and support of powerful European powers such as France and Spain, who moved from covertly supplying the Americans with arms and supplies, to outright support them militarily, moving the war to the global stage.

The new Continental Army suffered greatly from the lack of an effective training regime, and mostly inexperienced officers and NCOs. The inexperience of his officers was compensated in part by his senior officers; officials such as George Washington , Horatio Gates , Charles Lee , Richard Montgomery and Francis Marion all had military experience with the British Army during the French and Indian War . The Americans solved their training dilemma during their stint in the Winter Quarters at the Valley Forge, where they were relentlessly coached and educated by General Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben, a veteran of the famous Prussian General Staff. He taught the Continental Army the basics of military discipline, drill, tactics, and strategy, and wrote the Revolutionary War Training Manual . When the army emerged from the Valley Forge it proved its ability to match the British troops equally in battle as they fought a successful strategic action at the Battle of Monmouth .

When the war began, the 13 colonies lacked a professional army or navy. Each colony sponsored a local militia. The militias were lightly armed, had little training, and usually had no uniform. Their squads, served up for only a few weeks or months at a time, refused to travel far from home and were thus inaccessible to extended operations and lacked the training and discipline of soldiers with more experience. If properly used, however, their numbers could help the Continental Armies overwhelm smaller British forces, as in the battles of Concord , Bennington , and Saratoga .and the siege of Boston. Both sides used partisan warfare, but the Americans effectively suppressed Loyalist activity when British regulars were not in the area.

In an effort to coordinate the war effort, the Continental Congress established a regular army on June 14, 1775, and appointed George Washington as commander in chief. The development of the Continental Army has always been a work in progress, and Washington employed both its regulars and the state militia throughout the war.

The United States Marine Corps traces its established roots to the Continental Marines of the war, formed by resolution of the Continental Congress on November 10, 1775, a date regarded and celebrated as the birthday of the Marine Corps. In early 1776, Washington's army had 20,000 men, with two-thirds enlisted in the Continental Army and another third in various state militias. At the end of the American Revolution in 1783, both the Continental Marines and the Continental Marines were disbanded. Approximately 250,000 men served as regulars or as militias for the Revolutionary cause in the eight years of the war, but there were never more than 90,000 soldiers at one time.

The armies were small by the European standards of the era, mostly due to limitations such as the lack of powder and other logistical capabilities on the American side. It was also difficult for the UK to transport troops across the Atlantic and they were dependent on local supplies, which the Patriots tried to cut off. For comparison, Duffy notes that Frederick the Great usually commanded between 23,000 and 50,000 in battle. Both numbers pale in comparison to the armies that would have been fielded in the early 19th century, where troop formations approached or exceeded 100,000 men.

Loyalists
Historians have estimated that approximately 40 to 45 percent of the colonists supported the rebellion, while 15 to 20 percent remained loyal to the Crown. The rest tried to remain neutral and kept a low profile.

At least 25,000 Loyalists fought for the British. Thousands served in the Royal Navy. On land, Loyalist forces fought alongside the British in most battles in North America. Many Loyalists fought in partisan units, especially in the southern theater.

The British military met with many difficulties in increasing the use of Loyalist factions. British historian Jeremy Blackwrote, "During the American War it was clear to both the royal generals and the revolutionaries who organized and significant Loyalist activity would require the presence of British forces." In the South, the use of the Loyalists presented the British with "major problems of strategic choice" since while it was necessary to disperse troops widely to defend the Loyalist areas, it was also recognized that there was a need for "the maintenance of the numerous concentrated forces that are able" to counter the main attacks from US forces. In addition, the British were forced to ensure that their military actions "would not violate Loyalist opinion" by eliminating such options as trying to "live off the country", destroying property in order to intimidate or force payments from the colonists ("putting them under a deposit").

British
Britain entered the war with confidence; it had the most powerful navy in the world, a well-trained professional army, a sound financial system that could pay the costs, stable government, and experienced leadership. However, they were beset with major problems. Compared to the Americans, the British had no major allies, and were only lent troops by small German states to support the small British army. At the start of the war, the British army was less than 48,000 strong international, and suffered from a lack of effective replacements. By 1778 the army was pardoning convicts for military service and expanded the age range for service to be from 16 to 50. Although its officer and sergeant corps was relatively professional and experienced, this professionalism was diluted because the rich lacking military experience of the people could buy commissions and promotions. As a consequence, inexperienced officers sometimes found their way into positions of high responsibility.

Distance was also a major problem for the British. Although the Royal Navy was the largest and most experienced in the world at the time, it sometimes took months for troops to reach North America, and orders were often out of date because the military situation on the ground had changed by the time they arrived. In addition, the British had logistical problems every time they worked far from the coast; they were vulnerable to guerrilla attackson their supply chain every time they went far inland. On a logistical note, the flints used in British weapons also put them at a disadvantage on the battlefield. The British flints could only fire for 6 rounds before requiring a resharpening, while the American flints could fire 60 rounds before resharpening. A common expression ran among entertainment organizers; which was that "The Yankee Flint was as good as a glass of grog". Although discipline was harsh in the army, entertainment organizers had little self-discipline; gambling, robbery, promiscuity and alcoholism were common problems among all ranks alike. The army suffered from a mediocre organization in terms of logistics, food supplies were often poor,

The suppression of the rebellion in America also posed other problems. At the start of the war, the British had approximately 8,000 men stationed in North America, however they were required to cover an area that stretched from northern Canada to Florida, a distance of nearly 2,000 miles (3,200 km). Because the colonies were not unified before the war, there was no central area of ​​strategic importance. In European conflicts, the capture of the capital often meant the end of the war; however, in America, when the British captured key cities such as New York, Philadelphia or Boston - or Washington D.C. during the War of 1812thirty years later — the war continued unremittingly. Moreover, despite the fact that at its height, the British fielded some 56,000 men in the colonies, exclusive of mercenaries and militia, they lacked sufficient numbers to both defeat the Americans on the battlefield and simultaneously occupy the captured areas. It was not uncommon for the Americans to suffer a losing streak, only to have a British retreat because they could not occupy the occupied land. Despite strong Loyalist support, these troops were often moved by the Patriot militia when British regulars were not in the area, demonstrated in battles such as Kings Mountain.. Labor shortages became important when France, Spain and the Netherlands entered the war, as the British were spread across several theaters around the world when before they were concentrated only in America.

The British also had to contend with several psychological factors during the conflict. The need to maintain Loyalist allegiance provided setbacks, as the British could not use the harsh quelling methods they had used in Ireland and Scotland. Loyalists often came from the same communities as the Patriots, and as a result such methods could not be used for fear of alienating them. Even despite these restrictions, neutral colonists were often led into the ranks of the Revolutionaries due to conflict, such as the war in the Carolinas, marked by heavy brutality on both sides. As a result of a shortage of manpower and Patriot control of the countryside where the majority of the American population lived, the British often could not simultaneously defeat the Americans on the field and occupy the captured areas,Philadelphia and Carolinas after great initial success. A single American victory could often reverse the impact of a string of British successes, as shown by engagements at Trenton , Bennington , King's Mountain and even wins such as Germantown , all of which went a long way in galvanizing Patriot support for the war, and persuading European powers such as France and Spain to support the uprising.

At the beginning of 1775, the British army consisted of about 36,000 men worldwide, but military recruitment steadily increased this number. Britain had a hard time appointing generals, however. General Thomas Gage , in command of British forces in North America when the rebellion began, was criticized for being too lenient (perhaps under the influence of his American wife ). General Geoffrey Amhirst , 1st Baron Amhurst turned down the appointment as commander-in-chief due to unwillingness to take sides in the conflict. Similarly, Admiral August Keppel turned off the command, saying "I can't get my sword for this reason." Earl of Effinghampublicly resigned his commission when his 22nd foot Regiment was posted to America, and William Howe and John Burgoyne were MPs who opposed the military solutions of the American rebellion. Howe and Henry Clinton stated that they were unwilling participants in the war and only followed orders.

During the course of the war, Britain signed agreements with various German states which supplied some 30,000 soldiers. The Germans made up approximately one-third of the British troop strength in North America. The Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel contributed more soldiers than any other state, and the German soldiers became known as "Sackcloths" to the Americans. Revolutionary speakers called German soldiers "foreign mercenaries" and they are despised as such in the Declaration of Independence. By 1779 the number of British and German troops stationed in North America was over 60,000, although they were spread from Canada to Florida. Initially, several German principalities offered military support to Britain, but these proposals were rejected. However, as the war dragged on it became clear that Britain would need additional manpower from the German states and led to Britain seeking support from German principalities such as Hesse-Kassel and Ansbach-Beirut.

Secretary of State at War Lord Barrington and Adjutant General Edward Harvey were both strongly opposed to direct war on land. In 1766 Barrington recommended that the army be withdrawn from the 13 Colonies to Canada, Nova Scotia and Florida. At the start of the war, he called for a naval blockade that would quickly cripple the trading activities of the colonists.

African Americans
African Americans —slave and free—served on both sides during the war. British recruited slaves owned by Patriot owners and promised freedom to those who served as an act of Lord Dunmore's Proclamation . Due to a shortage of manpower, George Washington lifted the ban on black enlistment in the Continental Army in January 1776. Small all-black units were formed in Rhode Island and Massachusetts ; many slaves were promised freedom to serve. (Some men promised that freedom would be transferred back to their owners after the war was over out of political convenience. George Washington received and ignored letters from re-enslaved soldiers.) Another all-black unit came fromSaint-Domingue with French colonial forces. At least 5,000 black soldiers fought for the Revolutionary cause.

Tens of thousands of slaves escaped during the war and joined the British lines; others simply drove off in chaos. For example, in South Carolina, almost 25,000 slaves (30% of the enslaved population) escaped, migrated or died during the destruction of the war. This greatly destroyed plantation production during and after the war. When they withdrew their troops from Savannah and Charleston, the British also evacuated 10,000 Loyalist slaves. Overall, the British evacuated almost 20,000 blacks at the end of the war. More than 3,000 of them were freedmen, and most of them resettled in Nova Scotia; other blacks were sold in the West Indies.

Native Americans
Most Native Americans east of the Mississippi River were affected by the war, and many communities were divided over how to respond to the conflict. Although several tribes were friendly with the Americans, most Native Americans opposed the United States as a potential threat to their territory. Some 13,000 Native Americans fought on the British side, with the largest group coming from the Iroquois tribes, who fielded some 1,500 men. The strong Iroquois Confederacy was shattered by the conflict; although the Confederacy did not side with the Seneca , Onondaga , and Cayuga countriessided with the British. Members of the Mohawk fought on both sides. Many Tuscarora and Oneida sided with the colonists. The Continental Army sent the Sullivan Expedition on raids throughout New York to cripple the Iroquois tribes who had sided with the British. Both during and after the military disagreements between Mohawk leaders Joseph Louis Cook and during and after Joseph Brant , who sided with the Americans and British respectively, further intensified the division.

Creek and Britain's Seminole allies fought the Americans in Georgia and South Carolina. In 1778 a force of 800 Creeks destroyed American settlements along the Broad River in Georgia. The Creek Warriors also joined Thomas Browne's raids into South Carolina and aided Britain during the Siege of Savannah . Many Native Americans were involved in the struggle between Britain and Spain on the Gulf Coast and the Mississippi River - mostly on the British side. Thousands of Brooks, Chickasaws and Choctaws fought at or near major battles such as the Battle of Fort Charlotte .The Battle of the Mobiles , and the Siege of Pensacola .

Gender, race, class
Pybus (2005) estimates that about 20,000 slaves defected or were captured by the British, of whom about 8,000 died of disease or injuries or were brought back by the Patriots, and 12,000 left the country at the end of the war, for freedom in Canada or slavery in the West India.

Player (2006) explores family dynamics and mobilization for the Revolution in central Massachusetts. He reports that war and agricultural culture were sometimes incompatible. The militias found that living and working on the family farm did not prepare them for wartime, as did the rigors of camp life. Stormy individualism was in conflict with military discipline and grouping. A man's birth order often influenced his military recruitment, with younger sons going to war and older sons taking charge of the farm. A person's household duties and widespread patriarchy may have hindered mobilization. Harvesting duties and family emergencies pulled the men home regardless of the sergeant's orders. Some relatives might be Loyalists, creating internal tensions.

McDonnell (2006) shows that a major complication in Virginia's mobilization of troops was the conflict of interests of distinct social classes that tended to undercut the united commitment to the Patriot cause. The Assembly balanced the competing demands of the elite slave owning planters, mediocre yeomanry(some ownership of several slaves), and landless indentured servants, among other groups. The Assembly used deferrals, taxes, substitution of military service, and conscription to resolve tensions. The unresolved class conflict, however, made these laws less valid. There were strong protests, many cases of evasion and large-scale defections, so that Virginia's contributions came to embarrassingly low levels. With the British invasion of the state in 1781, Virginia was mired in class division as his natural son, George Washington, made desperate calls for troops.

War costs
Victims
Americans and Allies
The total amount of life lost during the war is largely unknown. As was typical during the wars of the era, disease claimed many more lives than battle. Between 1775 and 1782 a smallpox epidemic swept through North America, killing 40 people in Boston alone. Historian Joseph Ellis suggests that Washington's decision to vaccinate his troops against a smallpox epidemic, including the use of biological warfare by the British, was one of his most important decisions.

At least 25,000 US Patriots have died while on active duty. Approximately 6,800 of these deaths were in battle; the other 17,000 deaths recorded were from disease, including some 8,000-12,000 who died of starvation or illness brought on by deplorable conditions while prisoners of war , most in the rotting British prison courts in New York. Another estimate, however, places the full death toll at around 70,000, which if true would have made the conflict proportionately deadlier than the American Civil War .. The uncertainty is the result of the number of deaths from the disease, which were considered to be quite numerous, amounting to about 10,000 in 1776 alone. The number of Patriots seriously injured or disabled by the war has been estimated from 8,500 to 25,000. Proportional to the population of the colonies, the Revolutionary War was at least the second deadliest conflict in American history , ranking before World War II and behind only the Civil War.

British and allies
In 1784 a British lieutenant compiled a detailed list of 205 British officers killed in action during the war, including deaths in Europe, the Caribbean, and the East Indies. An extrapolation based on this list puts British army casualties at about 4,000 killed and died of wounds. A table from 1781 places total British army deaths at 6,046 in North America (from 1775-1779) and 3,326 in the West Indies (from 1778-1780). Approximately 1,800 Germans were killed in action, out of a total of 7,774 deaths. British profits in 1783 listed 43,633 ordinary deaths "in British service".

Approximately 171,000 sailors served in the Royal Navy during the war; about a quarter were forced into service. Approximately 1,240 were killed in the battle, while 18,500 died of disease (numbers from 1776-1780 only). The greatest killer was scurvy, a disease that was shown to be preventable by releasing lemon or lime juice to sailors, but was not taken seriously. Scurvy would be eradicated in the Royal Navy in the 1790s by the chairman of the Sick Navy and Board of Injuries, Gilbert Blaine . Approximately 42,000 British sailors are abandoned during the war.

Financial expenses
The British spent around £80m and ended up with a public debt of £250m, which they easily funded at around £9.5m a year on interest. The French spent 1.3 billion livres (approximately £56 million). Their total national debt was £187m, which they could not easily fund; over half of the French national income went into debt service in the 1780s. The debt crisis was a major factor in enabling the French Revolutionbecause the government could not raise taxes without public approval. The United States spent $37 million nationally plus $114 million by states. This was mostly covered by loans from France and the Netherlands, loans from the Americans, and the issuance of an increasing amount of paper money (which became "not worth the Continental"). USA. finally resolved his debt and currency problems in the 1790s when Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton provided legislation whereby the national government assumed all national debts, and in addition created a national bank and financing system based on tariffs and bond issues that paid external debts.

see also
Battles of the American Revolutionary War
British Army during the American War of Independence
Bibliography of the American Revolutionary War
Diplomacy in the American Revolutionary War
First agreement regarding San Ildefonso
First League of Armed Neutrality
Fourth Anglo-Dutch War
George Washington during the American Revolution
History of the United States of America
American nobility
Intelligence in the American Revolutionary War
List of British forces in the American Revolutionary War
List of Continental forces in the American Revolutionary War
List of plays and films about the American Revolution
List of revolutions and uprisings
Notes
To avoid duplication, notes for sections with a "Main Article" link will be found in the linked article.

Additional Reading
Black, Jeremy . The War for America: The Struggle for Independence, 1775–1783 . 2001. Analysis from a noted British military historian.
Benn, Carl. Historic Fort York, 1793–1993 . Toronto: Dundurn Press Ltd., 1993. ISBN 0-920474-79-9.
Boatner, Mark Mayo, III. Encyclopedia of the American Revolution. 1966; revised 1974. ISBN 0-8117-0578-1. Military topics, links to many secondary sources.
Chambers, John Whiteclay II, editor in chief. The Oxford Companion to American Military History . Oxford University Press , 1999. ISBN 0-19-507198-0.
Curtis, Edward E. The Organization of the British Army in the American Revolution (Yale UP 1926) online
Duffy, Christopher. Military Experience in the Age of Reason, 1715–1789 Routledge, 1987. ISBN 978-0-7102-1024-1.
Edler, Friedrich. The Dutch Republic and the American Revolution . University Press of the Pacific, 1911, reprinted 2001. ISBN 0-89875-269-8.
Ellis, His Excellency Joseph J.: George Washington . (2004). ISBN 1-4000-4031-0.
Fenn, Elizabeth Ann. Syphilis Americana: The Great Smallpox Epidemic 1775–82 . New York: Hill & Van, 2001. ISBN 0-8090-7820-1.
Fisher, David Hackett . Crossing Washington . New York: Oxford University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-19-517034-2.
Fletcher, Charles Robert Leslie. An Introductory History of England: The Great European War , Volume 4 . E.P. Dutton, 1909. OCLC 12063427.
Green, Jack P. and Pole, JR, eds. Blackwell's Encyclopedia of the American Revolution . Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1991; reprint 1999. ISBN 1-55786-547-7. The collection of essays focused on political and social history.
Gilbert, Alan. Black Patriots and Loyalists: The Struggle for Emancipation during the Revolutionary War . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012. ISBN 978-0-226-29307-3. Introduction .
Higginbotham, Don . The War of American Independence: Military Relations, Politics and Practice, 1763–1789 . Northeastern University Press, 1983. ISBN 0-930350-44-8. Overview of military topics; online at the ACLS History E-Book Project.
Morrissey, Brendan. Monmouth Courthouse 1778: The last great battle in the north . Osprey Publishing, 2004. ISBN 1-84176-772-7.
Jensen, Merrill. The Founding of the Nation: A History of the American Revolution 1763–1776. (2004)
Kaplan, Sidney and Emma Nogradi Kaplan. Black Presence in the Era of the American Revolution . Amherst, MA: The University of Massachusetts Press , 1989. ISBN 0-87023-663-6.
Ketchum, Richard M. The Lady's Large Suitcase: The Turning Point of the American Revolutionary War . Henry Holt, 1997. ISBN 0 8050 4681 X.
Mackesy, Piers . The War for America: 1775–1783 . London, 1964. Reissued by the University of Nebraska Press , 1993. ISBN 0-8032-8192-7. A highly regarded examination of British strategy and leadership.
McCullough, David . 1776 . New York: Simon & Schuster, 2005.
Riddick, John F. A History of British India: A Chronology . Greenwood Publishing Group, 2006. ISBN 978-0-313-32280-8.
Savas, Theodore P. and Dameron, J. David. Handbook of the Battles of the American Revolution. New York: Savas Beatie LLC, 2006. ISBN 1 932714 12 X.
Schama, Simon. , New York, NY: Ecco/HarperCollins, 2006
Shy, John. Men, Numerous and Armed: Reflections on the Military Struggle for American Independence . New York: Oxford University Press, 1976 (ISBN 0-19-502013-8); revised University of Michigan Press, 1990 (ISBN 0-472-06431-2). Essay collection.
Stevenson, Orlando W. "The Supply of Gunpowder in 1776", American Historical Review , Vol. 30, No. 2 (January 1925), pp. 271-281 in JSTOR .
Graves, Robert and Isabelle. That Dear Enemy: The French and the British from the Sun King to the Gift of Random House, 2007. ISBN 978-1-4000-4024-7.
Trevelyan, George Otto. George Third and Charles Fox: The Final Part of the American Revolution Longmans, Green, 1912.
Watson, J. Stephen. The Reign of George III, 1760–1815 . 1960. The Standard History of British Politics.
Weigley, Russell F. The American Way of War . Indiana University Press, 1977. ISBN 978-0-253-28029-9.
Weintraub, Stanley. Tears of Iron: America's Fight for Liberty, British Marsh: 1775–1783 . New York: Free Press, 2005 (a division of Simon and Schuster). ISBN 0-7432-2687-9. An account of British policy on the conduct of the war.
Reference literature
These are some of the standard writings on the war in general that are not mentioned above; books about specific campaigns, battles, units and people can be found in those articles.

Billias, George Athen. Generals and Adversaries of George Washington: Their Deeds and Leadership (1994) academic studies of key generals on each side
Conway, Stephen. The War of American Independence 1775–1783 . Publisher:E. Arnold, 1995. ISBN 0-340-62520-1. 280 pages.
Dziennik, Matthew. "Fatal Land: War, Empire, and the Mountain Soldier in British America, 1756-1783". (PhD dissertation, University of Edinburgh, 2011). Online , With detailed bibliography
Lowell, Edward J. Burlaps in the Revolution Williamstown, Massachusetts, Corner House Publishers, 1970, reprint
Bancroft, George . History of the United States of America, from the discovery of the American continent. (1854–78), vol. 7-10.
Bobrick, Benson. Angel in the Whirlwind: The Triumph of the American Revolution . Penguin, 1998 (paperback reprint).
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory, and Ryerson, Richard A., eds. Encyclopedia of the American Revolutionary War: Political, Social, and Military History (ABC-CLIO, 2006) 5 volume newspapers and online editions; 1,000 entries by 150 experts covering all topics
Frey, Sylvia R. The British Soldier in America: A Social History of Military Life in the Revolutionary Period (University of Texas Press, 1981).
Hibbert, Christopher .. New York: Norton, 1990. ISBN 0 393 02895 X.
Kwasny, Mark W. Washington's Guerrilla Warfare, 1775–1783 . Kent, Ohio: 1996. ISBN 0-87338-546-2. Militia war.
Middlekauff, Robert . A Magnificent Reason: The American Revolution, 1763–1789 . Oxford University Press, 1984; revised 2005. ISBN 0-19-516247-1. online release
Contains a detailed list of American, French, British, German and Loyalist regiments; indicates when they were raised, the main battles, and what happened to them. Also includes major warships on both sides AND all important battles.
Symonds, Craig L. Battlefield Atlas of the American Revolution (1989), newly drawn maps emphasizing the movement of military units
Ward, Christopher. War of the Revolution . (2 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1952.) Earth's history struggles in North America.
Wood, W. J. Battles of the Revolutionary Wars, 1775–1781 . ISBN 0-306-81329-7 (2003 paperback reprint). An analysis of the tactics of a dozen battles, with a focus on American military leadership.
Warrior Series: short (48pp), very well illustrated descriptions:
Zlatich, Marko; Copeland, Peter. General Washington Army (1): 1775–78 (1994)
Zlatich, Marco. General Washington Army (2): 1779–83 (1994)
Chartrand, Rene. French Army during the American War of Independence (1994)
May, Robin. British Army in North America 1775–1783 (1993)
The Devotee in Time of War , a treatise on light infantry tactics written by Colonel Andreas Emmerich in 1789.
External links
Freedom - The American Revolution from PBS
American Revolutionary War 1775–1783 in the news
Important battles of the American Revolutionary War
Bibliographies
Library of Congress Guide to the American Revolution
Bibliography of the War of American Independence , compiled by the United States Army Center of Military History
Political bibliography from the Omohundro Institute for Early American History and Culture