 
War of American colonies for independence
The War of the Colonies for Independence, or the American Revolution, dates back to the second half of the 18th century in which 13 Colonies became United States of America gained independence from the British Empire.

During this period, the colonies united against the British and entered a period of armed conflict known as the Revolutionary War or War of Independence, between 1775 and 1783. This culminated in the United States Declaration of Independence and victory on the battlefield in about 1781. .

France played a key role in helping the revolution, supplying American patriots with finance and ammunition, and organizing a coalition against Britain and sending a navy and navy that played a decisive role in the war and effectively ended the war at Yorktowna. Americans, despite being influenced by Enlightenment philosophers. they opposed the absolute monarchy as a model of government and did not regard France's form of government as a model.

The American Revolution included a series of broad intellectual and social movements that emerged in early American society, such as the new Republican ideals that took root in the American population. In some colonies, fierce political debates erupted over the role of democracy in government. America was moving toward Republicanism, just as democracy was gradually expanding, revolutionizing the traditional social hierarchy and creating the ethics that shaped the core of American political values.

The period of the revolution began in 1763, when France ceased to threaten the English colonies militarily. By accepting the view that colonies should pay a significant portion of their defense spending, Britain imposed a series of taxes that became unpopular because the colonies lacked elected representatives in the British Parliament, many colonists considered the laws illegitimate. After the protests in Boston, Britain withdrew combat troops and the Americans mobilized militias. Fighting broke out in 1775. Although the Loyalists were 15-20% of the population, during the war the Patriots controlled 80-90% of their territory and Britain could only hold a few coastal towns. In 1776, representatives of 13 colonies elected unanimously the Declaration of Independence established by the United States of America. The Americans formed a coalition with France in 1778 that balanced military and naval forces. Two British armies were captured at Saratoga in 1777 and Yorktowne in 1781, and this led to a peace treaty in Paris in 1783. At the time of their creation, the United States was bordered by British Canada to the north, Spanish Florida to the south and the Mississippi River to the west.

No taxes without representation.

Since 1763, the United Kingdom has owned large territories in North America. In addition to the thirteen colonies, 22 smaller ones were administered directly by the royal governors. Victory in the Seven Years' War brought Britain to New France (Canada), Spain, Florida and the Indian Territories, east of the Mississippi River. In 1765, the colonists were still considered subjects loyal to the royal crown, with the same historical rights and obligations as subjects in Great Britain.

The British government decided to tax its American colonies, primarily to help pay for their defenses in North America against France in the Seven Years' War. The problem for many American colonists was not the level of the tax (taxes were actually lower than those paid by the average British citizen), but the fact that the new taxes were not discussed with the colonists, and since they had no representation in Parliament, the phrase "No taxes without representation" (No Taxation without Representation) "has become popular in many American circles. London argued that Americans were represented "virtually", but most Americans rejected the theory advocated in London by people who knew nothing about their needs and conditions.

According to the theory, Britain had already regulated the colony's economy through the Maritime Laws, which complied with the principles of mercantilism, which said that all that the empire benefited from was good. Widespread avoidance of this law has been tolerated for a long time. But now through decrees (Writs of Assistance) they have been hard pushed. In 1761, Messaschusett's lawyer James Otis argued that these decrees violated the constitutional rights of the colonists. He lost the case, but John Adams wrote "American Independence Was Then and There.

" he turned from the father of the people into a tyrant and questioned the right to obey him

.

In 1764, Parliament enacted the Sugar Act and the Monetary Act, supporting the oppression of the colonists. The protest led to a new powerful weapon, a systematic boycott of British goods. The British pushed the colonists even further when the Quartering Act passed that same year, which stipulated that they take care of British soldiers in certain territories. In 1765, the Stamp Act introduced a direct tax on colonists for the first time by parliament. All newspapers, almanacs, pamphlets and official documents as well as board games and cards had to have a colk. All 13 colonies vehemently protested, and popular leaders such as Patrick Henry of Virginia and James Otis of Massachusetts provoked people to protest. The "Sons of Liberty" was formed in many cities, and threatened violence if someone sold stamps and did not. At the Boston Sons of Liberty, they burned the records of the vice-admiralty court and looted the elegant home of Justice Chief Thomas Hutchinson. Several legislatures called for joint action, and 9 colonies sent delegates to the New York Stamp Act in October 1765. Interviews conducted by John Dickinson drafted the "Declaration of Rights and Grievances" agreed that taxes were unreasonable and violating The public weight of the argument was an economic boycott of British goods, as imports into the colony fell from £ 2,250,000 in 1764 to £ 1,944,000 in 1765. The Rockingam government came to power, and parliament led a debate or to cancel the stamp duty , or to send an army in his support, Benjamin Franklin described the American case, he explained that the colonies were materially and physically exhausted from a series of wars with the French and Indians, and bled to defend the empire, and that taxes for these wars were unfair and could bring rebellion. Parliament agreed and withdrew the tax, but in the "Declaration Act" in March 1766 it demanded that it retain the power to set laws for the colonies.

In Boston on March 5, 1770, a crowd gathered around a group of British soldiers. The crowd grew, threatening and throwing snowballs and rubbish at the soldiers. In confusion, all but one of the soldiers shot at the crowd. 11 people were hit and 5 died of their injuries. the event quickly became known as the Boston Massacre. The exaggeration and spread of the massacre changed the colonists' feelings towards Britain. The event also spun a spiral of relations between the British and the colonies, especially in Massachusetts.

In 1767, the British Government passed the Townshend Act, which taxed several essential goods, including paper, glass and tea. Annoyed by the tax increase, the colonists organized a boycott of British goods. On December 16, a group of men led by Samuel Adams, disguised as Mojave Indians, snuck into a British tea boat and dumped approximately 10,000 pounds of goods into the sea. The event became known as the Boston Tea party and became important to American patriotic doctrine.

The British government responded by introducing several ordinances, which became known as "Intolerable Acts" and included, among other things, the closure of Boston Harbor until the colonies identified traders whose goods had been destroyed. Unacceptable regulations, of course, have exacerbated the colony's view of Britain. Liberalism and Republicanism

John Locke's ideas on liberalism significantly influenced the political thinking behind the revolution, for example, the "social contract" theory included the people's natural right to remove leaders if they betrayed the historical rights of the English. In writing the state and national constitutions, Americans used Montesquieu's analysis of an ideally balanced British constitution.

The driving force behind the revolution was the American content of a political ideology called "Republicanism," which was dominant in the colonies until 1775. Britain's country party, which criticized the British government, emphasized the need to fear corruption had an impact on American politicians. The colonists associated "court" with luxury and hereditary aristocracy, which Americans increasingly condemned. Corruption was the greatest potential evil, and civic virtue required civic duty to be placed against one's own interests. Men had a civic duty to fight for the homeland. For women, "republican motherhood" became an ideal, exemplified by: Abigail Adams, Merci Otis Warren. The primary duty of Republican women was to instill Republican values ​​in their children and to avoid luxury and affection. "

Dispute over western territories.

The Royal Decree of 1763 restricted the movement of Americans across the Appalachian Mountains, and, ignoring the decree, groups of settlers continued to move west. The decree was amended in a very short time and was no longer an obstacle for the settlers, but its decree was written without consultation with the Americans, which angered the colonists. The Qubec Act of 1774 shifted the borders of Quebec to the Ohio River, and ignored complaints from 13 colonies about their territory. From that moment on, the Americans only took into account the laws of London. They began training militia and organizing war.

Crisis 1772-1775

Although a number of events took place during the American Revolution, it was a specific series of events that led to the outbreak of war. In June 1772, the so-called The Gaspée affair, a British warship that sharply enforced unpopular trade restrictions, was burned by American patriots. Soon after, Governor Thomas Hutchinson of Massachusetts announced that he and the royal judges would be paid directly from London, thus bypassing the colonial legislature. Later in 1772, Samuel Adams formed the Committees of Correspondence, which united patriots in 13 colonies and eventually provided a framework for rebel rule. At the beginning of 1773, Virginia, the largest colony, created its own (Committees of Correspondence), in which Patrick Henry and Thomas Jefferson also worked.

The "Intolerable Acts", as they were named by the colonists, complied with 4 laws passed by the British Parliament. The first was the Massachusetts Government Act, which amended the Massachusetts Charter and limited city meetings. The second regulation was an order from the Department of Justice, which ordered that all British soldiers be recruited in Great Britain, not in the colonies. The third was the Boston Port Act, which closed the port of Boston unless losses were made to Britain at the Boston Tea Party. (Not a penny was ever returned to Britain). The fourth ordinance was the "Quartering Act" of 1774, which allowed British troops to be housed in uninhabited buildings. The First Continental Congress upheld the Suffolk Resolution, which declared "

In response in particular to the Massachusetts Government Act, the people of Worchester created a line of militants before a local court and refused to admit British judges. Similar events began to take place throughout the colony. The British army was sent from England until the entire colony of Massachusetts arrived, except for the city of Boston, where there was a large British garrison, overthrew the local British government.

Fighting broke out in Lexinton in 1775.

The Battle of Lexington and Concord broke out on 19,4,1755 when the British sent a regiment to confiscate weapons and arrest the revolutionaries in Concord. It was the first battle in the American Revolutionary War, and the administration immediately aroused 13 colonies that called in militia and sent troops to besiege Boston. The Battle of Bunker Hill broke out on June 17, 1776. In the spring of 1176, with Commander George Washing as commander, the Americans forced the British to leave Boston. The Patriots had control in all 13 colonies and were ready to declare independence. Although there were many Loyalists in the Colonies, they had no control anywhere, since July 1776 and all British officers have fled.

The Second Continental Congress was convened in 1775 after the start of the war. Congress created the Continental Army and sent a call (Olive Branch Petition) to the king in an effort to reconcile. King George III refused to accept her and instead issued a "Proclamation of Rebellion", demanding action against the "traitors". Until 1783, he did not negotiate with the colonies.

Division of parties: Patriots, Loyalists, Neutral Patriots - revolutionaries

The revolutionaries were also called "Patriots", "Liberals", "Congressmen" or "Americans". They came from all economic and social groups, but unanimously supported the need to defend the rights of Americans. After the war, Patriots like George Washington, James Madison, John Adams, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay were deeply committed to Republicanism and also longed to build a rich and powerful nation, while Patriots
like Patrick Henry, Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas Jefferson advocated democratic incentives and interests. farmers who wanted wider political equality for society.

The word "Patriot" is used in this work in the context of a man in a colony who identified with the American Revolution. Calling revolutionaries "Patriots" is a common custom. It has nothing to do with other synonyms of the word.

Loyalists and neutrals.

Although it is not possible to find out the exact number historians estimate that 15% - 20% of the colony's population remained loyal to the British Crown, these became known as "Loyalists", "Conservatives (Tories)", "Kings Men". . Loyalists were usually older who less wished to break the old allegiance to the crown, often associated with the Church of England, and had many established trades and business connections throughout the British Empire, such as Thomas Hutchinson of Boston. New immigrants,

There were notable examples of Loyalists who were not high-ranking, although their numbers merged with the number of Loyalists. An important example of this is the Native Americans who refused the Americans' request to remain neutral, and many tribes joined the Loyalists. Both sides led to a Loyalism motive, securing the influence of local tribes that depended on colonial trade, which led to the Patriots shunting.

Another very poorly documented group that joined the Loyalists were African-American slaves, who were actively recruited into the British Army to be released, could protect their families, and were often pledged.

Minorities of uncertain size remained neutral during the war. Mostly of the lower class. The most important of this group were the Quackers.

After the war, most Loyalists in America remained and lived a normal life. Some, such as Samuel Seabury, have become prominent American leaders. 100,000 - 200,000 loyalists moved to Canada, British West Indies, and caused one of the largest migrations in History. This was about 5% of the population. They took 75,000 slaves from them to the British West Indies, where their descendants became free 26 years earlier than they would be in the United States.

Class differences between Patriots.

Historians such as J. Franklin Jameson of the early 20th century have studied the class composition of the Patriots, looking for evidence that there was a class struggle during the revolution. Over the last 50 years, historians have abandoned this interpretation, instead emphasizing a high level of ideological unity. while the Loyalists were poor and rich loyalists. The Patriots formed a more diverse mix, with the clear that the richer and better educated had previously become an officer in the army. Ideological demands came first, the Patriots saw in independence a way to free themselves from British oppression and taxes, and above all they demanded their rights. The majority, farmers, craftsmen and small traders, joined the Patriots to achieve more political rights.

Creation of new constitutions of states.

In the summer of 1766, when the Patriots controlled all the territories, the Loyalists were powerless. All 13 states overthrew existing governments, closed courts and drove British Agents and governors from their homes. They elected an assembly and "legislation" that existed without a legitimate framework. A new constitution was needed in each state to change the Royalist character. Now they were states, not colonies.

On January 5, 1776, New Hampshire ratified the Constitution, six months before the Declaration of Independence was signed. In May 1776, Congress approved the suppression of any authority of the crown, and its replacement by a locally approved authority. Virginia, South Carolina, and New Jersey formed a constitution before July 4. Rhode Island and Connecticut simply amended their existing constitutions and removed all ties to the crown.

The new states had to decide what form of government they would form, first they had to figure out how to choose the ones that would create the constitution and how the subsequent document would be ratified. In states where affluent companies oversaw the process as in Maryland, Virginia, Delaware, New York and Massachusetts, the institutions had their own characteristics:

Property Census for Electoral Places.
Bicameral legislature.
A strong governor, with the right of veto, and great authority.
Notable individuals may have held several positions in the government.
The state faith was mentioned in them.

In states where the less affluent were able to organize well, especially in the states of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New Hampshire, the constitutions of these traits were approved.

Universal voting rights by age, or minimum property requirements for the opportunity to be elected or to hold office.
Strong unicameral legislature.
Relatively weak governor, without veto power and without significant authority.
Prohibition for individuals to hold more than one position.

Military History: Expulsion of the British 1776

In 1775, Boston was held by the British but surrounded by a militia of the surrounding colonies. Congress elected George Washington as commander, and he forced the British to leave the city in March 176. From that moment on, the Patriots controlled all 13 colonies and were ready to declare independence. Independence, 1776

On January 10, 1776, Thomas Paine published a political pamphlet called Common Sence, in which it was written that the only way to solve the problems with Britain was re-republicanism and the declaration of independence from Great Britain.

On July 2, 1776, the Declaration of Independence was ratified by the Second Continental Congress and signed on July 4, which is now a national holiday in the United States called Independence Day. The war began in April 1775, while the Declaration of Independence was issued in July 1776. Until this point, the colonies were only trying for a ceasefire, but from now on everyone was calling for independence.

The documents, known as The Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, also known as Articles of Confederation, formed the first government document of the United States, and united the colonies into a free confederation of sovereign states. The Second Continental Congress, accepted the articles in November 1777, although they were officially ratified within 3 years.

War: (The British return 1776-1777)

The British returned to the battle scene in August 1776, when they deployed the Continental Army to the greatest action during the revolution, the Battle of Long Island. Eventually, they captured New York City, which General Washington had previously acquired. They established a political and military base in the city and held it until 1783. They also occupied New Jersey, but by an unexpected attack, Washington crossed the Delaware River and entered New Jersey and defeated the British Army at Treatone and Priceton, and captured New Jersey. In 1777, the British launched two uncoordinated attacks. The crew in New York defeated Washington and occupied Philadelphia. Simultaneously, the Second Army invaded Canada in order to cut off New England. But she was trapped, and imprisoned in Saratoga, New York, in October 1777. This victory strengthened France to enter the war officially. and Benjamin Franklin began negotiations for a military alliance in 1778. Later, Spain and the Netherlands allied with France and left Britain to fight the war alone, from the blockade of the Atlantic. And so the Americans had only one front in the war with Britain.

Because of this alliance and the poor military situation, Sir Henry Clinton, the British Commander, left Philadelphia to strengthen New York City. General Washington tried to stop the retreat of the British, which led to the battle of Momouth Court House, the last major battle in the northern states. After conflicting negotiations, the British successfully retreated to New York. The Northern War then found itself in a stalemate.

The British are attacking the south.

The siege of Yorktown ended with the surrender of the British Army, and paved the way for an end to the American Revolutionary War. At the end of December 1778, the British occupied Savannah and began moving north to South Carolina; North Georgia was not occupied, due to the Patriots' victory at the Battle of Kettel Creek in Wilkes County, Georgia. The British moved to occupy Carleston and build a network of fortified islands, believing that the Loyalists would group in resistance. However, there were not enough Loyalists, so the British had to fight their way north to North Carolina and Virginia, where they expected to be rescued by the British fleet, which was defeated by the French fleet. Taken away in Yorktown, Virginia and under the combined attacks of American and French troops, the British Army under General Corwallis surrendered to Washington in October 1781. Although King George III wanted to fight, his supporters lost power in Parliament and the war ended in America's favor. The final naval battle took place on March 10, 1773 at the Cape Canaveral mission.

The question of traitors.

In August 1775, the King proclaimed the Americans, who rose as traitors to the crown. The British government first began treating prisoners as criminals. They were thrown into prison and tried against them for high treason. Lord Germain and Lord Sandwich were eager to begin these processes. A number of prisoners from Bunjers Hill expected to be hanged. But the governor decided to stop the trials and executions. Namely, there were 10,000 loyalists in the territories controlled by the Americans, who were threatened with retaliation by the Americans, and the British built their strategy on supporting the loyalists. After the defeat at Saratoga in 1777, thousands of British prisoners were in American hands, and were effective hostages. Therefore, no captured American was tried for treason, and even though they were mistreated, they were subject to the law of the warring party. In 1782, by a decree of Parliament, their status was changed from traitors to prisoners of war. After the war, both sides released their prisoners.

Peace Treaty: The Peace

Treaties with Great Britain, also known as the Treaties of Paris, gave the United States all land east of the Mississippi River and south of the Great Lakes, although it did not include Florida. (On September 3, 1783, Britain agreed with Spain to return Florida to Spain.)

The American Indian nations were not part of any agreement and were not interested in independence until they were defeated militarily by the U.S. military. Things about borders and debts were not resolved until the Jay Tready in 1795
